J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON REMEDIAL LAW
(Vol. 2, Special Proceedings,
Criminal Procedure & Evidence)

With case updates
Sixth (2020) edition
MANUEL R. RIGUERA
Professorial Lecturer, Far l;a~ter.h tJhi\l.ersityInstitute
of Law and University of Asia
& the Pacific Institute of Law
Review Director, Bar Reviewer, and Senior Coach,
Jurists Bar Review Center; Partner, Riguera &
Riguera Law Office
Former Commissioner, Legal Education Board

J9JC9B0M

Philippine Copyright 2020
by
MANUEL R. RIGUERA

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, uploaded,
downloaded, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without written permission of the author. For
information regarding permission, write to the author at the
2/F Azucena Arcade, 255 Alabang-Zapote Road,
Pampiona, Las Pirias City, Metro Manila, Philippines 17 40.
Every copy of this book must bear the original
signature of the author and a serial number on this page;
otherwise it shall be deemed to have come from an illegal
source and should not be sold, purchased, or distributed.
Thank you for supporting the author's rights and the
advancement of legal scholarship and research.

ISBN 978-621-02-1083-5

Published and Printed by
CENTRAL BOOK SUPPLY, INC.

927 Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, Philippines
Email: info@central.com.ph

J9JC9B0M

To Hazel, Jum, Aika, and Dmi.

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

PREFACE TO THE SIXTH (2020) EDITION
My practice has been to come up with new editions
every two years. My previous edition, the Fifth Edition, came
out in 2019 so the sixth edition would not have been
published until 2021. I was confident that the 2019 edition
would still serve the bar reviewees in good stead for the 2020
bar since the Proposed 2019 Amendments to the Rules of
Civil Procedure and Evidence, which were approved by the
Supreme Court, would become effective only in 1 May 2020,
well beyond the cut-off date of 30 June 2019.
However at around March of this year, the Supreme
Court issued its bulletin on the remedial law bar exam
examination which surprisingly included the proposed
2019 amendments in the bar exam coverage. Because the
2019 amendments virtually revised the Rules of Civil
Procedure and the Rules on Evidence and because of the
dearth of literature on the 2019 amendments due to its
recency, I felt I could be of some help to the bar reviewees
if I updated my book to reflect the 2019 amendments and
explain these amendments and their impact on the Rules
of Civil Procedure and the Rules on Evidence. The
lockdown imposed by the government as a result of the
COVID 19 crisis gave me adequate time to work on the
2020 edition.
The present edition continues the use of the Q&A
format which serves the dual purpose of not only
refreshing the reader's knowledge of legal theory but also
hones and sharpens his or her test-taking skills of factpattern recognition, analogy, and deduction. I have always
maintained that legal rules and case holdings are best
absorbed for deployment in the bar and law examinations
by studying them not in isolation but in the context of their
underlying fact-patterns.

J9JC9B0M

The importance of acquainting oneself with the latest
jurisprudence and developments cannot be gainsaid and
hence salient Supreme Court cases and issuances as well
as pertinent statutes and rules have been surveyed up to
the period ending 30 June 2019. In briefing Supreme Court
cases, I have employed a Q&A format or what I would call
a "micro-digest." My purpose was to present the most
concise summary that I could considering the limited time
available to the reviewee. In so doing, I have on quite a
few occasions taken some liberties with the facts but
without detracting from the essence and integrity of the
case law illustrated.
While written primarily for the bar reviewee and the
law student preparing for the bar and law school
examinations, this book could also be of some help to
members of the bench and bar who may use it to refresh
and update their knowledge of remedial law.
The writing, revision, and updating of Primer-Reviewer

would not have been possible without the support of my
publisher Central Books. I thank its President, Jose Paolo
M. Sibal, for his generous support, as well as the tireless
Girlie Gonzales for her guidance and assistance in the
printing and publication process.
Finally, I want to express my deep appreciation for
the unwavering encouragement and support of my wife
and my Muse, Atty. Hazel E. Rebadulla Riguera, and of my
children, Julliard Marie, Svetlana, and Dmitri. They have
been my beacon and inspiration all throughout these years
of writing and revising my book.

Manuel R. Riguera
Las Pinas City, May 2020

J9JC9B0M

NOTES ON SYMBOLS & MNEMONICS
(SS R2): Reference to Rules of Court. Here the
symbol stands for Section 5, Rule 2 of the Rules of Court.
"S" as a symbol for "Section" is also used for other rules
like the Rule on the Writ of Amparo.
(01 Bar Q1d ed): Reference to Bar Examination
Question in Remedial Law. Here the symbol indicates a
reference to the 2001 Bar Examination in Remedial Law,
Question No. 1, subquestion (d) and that the question was
edited ("ed").
(D FRENDS): Letters, usually in upper case, between
parentheses indicate a mnemonic or keyword. Here "D
FRENDS" stands for the keywords for the grounds for
attachment under 81 R57: DEPARTS, FRAUD, RECOVER,
EMBEZZLEMENT, NON-RESIDENT, DISPOSE, SUMMONS
BY PUBLICATION).
(FRE 801 [a]): Reference to the Federal Rules of
Evidence, Rule 801 (a).

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Rule 72.

SUBJECT MATTER & GENERAL RULES.......

3

SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES OF DECEASED PERSONS
VENUE & PROCESS ........................................
SUMMARY SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES ........
PRODUCTION OF WILL; ALLOWANCE
OF WILL NECESSARY .....................................
Rule 76. ALLOWANCE OR
DISALLOWANCE OF WILL ..............................
Rule 77. ALLOWANCE OF WILL PROVED
OUTSIDE OF PHILIPPINES .............................
Rule 78. SUMMARY SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES ........
Rule 79. OPPOSING ISSUANCE OF LETTERS
TESTAMENTAR, PETITION &
CONTEST FOR LETTERS
OF ADMINISTRATION .....................................
Rule 80. SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR ............................
Rule 81. BONDS OF EXECUTORS
& ADMINISTRATORS .......................................
Rule 82. REVOCATION OF ADMINISTRATION,
DEATH, RESIGNATION &
REMOVAL OF EXECUTORS
& ADMINISTRATORS .......................................
Rule 83. INVENTORY & APPRAISAL; PROVISION
FOR SUPPORT OF FAMILY ............................
Rule 84. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF
EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS ..........

Rule 73.
Rule 74.
Rule 75.

ix

11
20
29
35
51
54

60
64
67

73
76
78

J9JC9B0M

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Rule 85.
Rule 86.
Rule 87.

Rule 88.
Rule 89.

Rule 90.

ACCOUNTABILITY & COMPENSATION
OF EXECUTORS & ADMINISTRATORS.........
CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE
ACTIONS BY AND AGAINST
EXECUTORS &
ADMINISTRATORS
PAYMENT OF THE DEBTS
OF THE ESTATE
SALES, MORTGAGES, AND OTHER
ENCUMBRANCES OF
PROPERTY OF DECEDENT
DISTRIBUTION AND PARTITION
OF PROPERTY OF DECEDENT

79
84

103
109

111
112

OTHER SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Rule 91.
Rule 92.
Rule 93.
Rule 94.
Rule 95.

ESCHEATS
GUARDIANSHIP (VENUE)
APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIANS
BONDS OF GUARDIANS
SELLING & ENCUMBERING
PROPERTY OF THE WARD
Rule 96. GENERAL POWERS &
DUTIES OF GUARDIANS
Rule 97. TERMINATION OF GUARDIANSHIP
Rule 98. TRUSTEES
ADOPTION
Rule 102. HABEAS CORPUS
RULE ON THE WRIT OF AMPARO
RULE ON THE WRIT OF HABEAS DATA
Rule 103. CHANGE OF NAME
Rule 108. CANCELLATION OR CORRECTION OF
ENTRIES IN THE CIVIL REGISTRY
R.A. NO. 9048
x

127
131
133
140
141
143
145
146
149
161
189
210
226
237
262

J9JC9B0M

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Rule 107. ABSENTEES
Rule 109. APPEALS IN SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

274
277

CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
PRELIMINARIES
Rule 110. PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES
Rule 111. PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION
Rule 112. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION
Rule 113. ARREST
Rule 114. BAIL
Rule 115. RIGHTS OF ACCUSED
Rule 116. ARRAIGNMENT & PLEA
Rule 117. MOTION TO QUASH
Rule 118. PRE-TRIAL.
Rule 119. TRIAL
Rule 120. JUDGMENT
Rule 121. NEW TRIAL OR RECONSIDERATION
Rule 122. APPEAL
Rule 124. PROCEDURE IN THE
COURT OF APPEALS
Rule 126. SEARCH & SEIZURE
Rule 127. PROVISIONAL REMEDIES
IN CRIMINAL CASES

282
298
362
402
432
441
463
471
481
535
541
571
587
590
602
604
640

EVIDENCE
Rule 130. RULES OF ADMISSIBILITY
ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS RULE S3-7 R 130
PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
Rule 131. BURDEN OF PROOF
& PRESUMPTIONS
Rule 129. WHAT NEED NOT BE PROVED
Rule 132. PRESENTATION OF EVIDENCE.
xi

645
656
,. 683
912
925
938

J9JC9B0M

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
AUTHENTICATION AND PROOF
OF DOCUMENTS
Rule 133. WEIGHT & SUFFICIENCY
OF EVIDENCE
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CASES
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

961
1003

1006

APPENDICES
A.
B.
C.

D.

JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE
EFFICIENT USE OF PAPER RULE
(A.M. No.11-9-4-SC)
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR
CONTINUOUS TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)
RULE ON CYBERCRIME WARRANTS

1043
1051

1054
1078

J9JC9B0M

SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

RULE 72. SUBJECT MATTER AND
APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL RULES
Q.

What do you understand by remedial law?

A.

Remedial law is that branch of law which provides for
the jurisdiction of courts and the rules concerning
pleading, practice, and procedure before the courts.

Q.

What is a special proceeding?

A.

A special proceeding is a remedy by which a party
seeks to establish a status, a right, or a particular
fact. (S3 R 1)

Q.

Distinguish a special proceeding from
action.

A.

A special proceeding is distinguished from a civil
action as follows:

a civil

AS TO NATURE. A special proceeding is nonadversarial as it is not brought by one party against
another but is a remedy by which a party seeks to
establish a status, right, or a particular fact, while a
civil action is adversarial as it is a suit by one party
against another for the protection or enforcement of
a right or the prevention or redress of a wrong.
AS TO BINDING EFFECT. A special proceeding
is an in rem proceeding and hence binding upon
the whole world, while a civil action may or may not
be an in rem proceeding.
AS TO CAUSE OF ACTION. The concept of
cause of action finds no application in a special
proceeding, while a civil action, with the exception of
some special civil actions, must have a cause of action.

3

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the special proceedings mentioned in
the Rules of Court?

A.

As per the rules there are 14 special proceedings:
1)

Settlement of estate

2)

Esch eat

3)

Guardianship and custody of minors

4)

Trustees

5)

Adoption

6)

Rescission and revocation of adoption

7)

Hospitalization of insane persons

8)

Habeas corpus

9)

Change of name

10) Voluntary dissolution of corporations
11) Judicial approval of voluntary recognition of
minor natural children
12) Constitution of family home
13) Declaration of absence and death
14) Cancellation or correction of entries in the civil
registry
Note: The procedure for rescission and
revocation of adoption has been assimilated in the
Rule on Adoption which became effective on 22
August 2002. Petition for voluntary dissolution of
corporation is now filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission and not the courts pursuant
to Secs. 118 and 119 of the Corporation Code.

4

J9JC9B0M

RULE 72
Subject Matter And Applicability Of General Rules

After the effectivity of the Family Code, the concept
of the natural child was abolished and there is no
more need to constitute a family home for the same
is deemed automatically constituted under Art. 153
of the Family Code.

Q.

Is the enumerationof special proceedings in 51
R72exclusive?

A.

No. There are other special proceedings not
mentioned in S1 R72.
For instance a land
registration proceeding (Ting v. Heirs of Lirio, G.R.
No. 168913, 14 March 2007), petition for the issuance
of a writ of amparo or a writ of habeas data, a
liquidation proceeding ( Consolidated Bank & Trust
Co. v. United Pacific Leasing & Finance Corp., 19
October 2015), and proceedings under the Special
ADR Rules (Rule 1.2, Special ADR Rules). Any
remedy by which a party seeks to establish a status,
a right, or a particular fact is a special proceeding
though it may not have been mentioned in S1 R72.

Q.

Petitioner Fujiki is a Japanese national who
married respondent Maria Paz Marinay in the
Philippinesin 2004.The marriagedid not sit well
with petitioner's parents. Thus, Fujiki could not
bring his wife to Japan where he resides.
Eventually,they lost contact with each other. In
2008, Marinay met another Japanese, Maekara.
Without the first marriage being dissolved,
Marinay and Maekara were married in 2008 in
Quezon City, Philippines. Maekara brought
Marinay to Japan. However, Marinay allegedly
suffered physical abuse from Maekara.She left
Maekaraand started to contact Fujiki. Fujiki and
Marinay met in Japan and they were able to
reestablish their relationship. In 2010, Fujiki
5

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

helped Marinay obtain a judgment from a family
court in Japan which declared the marriage
between Marinay and Maekara void on the ground
of bigamy. In 2011, Fujiki filed a petition in the
RTC of Pasay City entitled: "Judicial Recognition
of Foreign Judgment (or Decree of Absolute
Nullity of Marriage)." Fujiki prayed that (1) the
Japanese Family Court judgment be recognized;
(2) that the bigamous marriage between Marinay
and Maekara be declared void ab initio; and (3) for
the RTC to direct the LCR of Quezon City to
annotate the Japanese Family Court judgment on
the Certificate of Marriage between Marinay and
Maekara and to endorse such annotation to the
Office of the Administrator and Civil Registrar
General in the NSO.
A few days after the filing of the petition, the
RTC immediately issued an Order dismissing the
petition based on Braza v. The City Civil

Registrar of Himamay/an City, Negros Occidental
(607 SCRA 638 [2009]) wherein the SC ruled that
"[i]n a special proceeding for correction of entry
under Rule 108, the trial court has no jurisdiction
to nullify marriages xx x." Was the Pasay City
RTC's dismissal of the petition correct?
A.

Since the recognition of a foreign judgment only
requires proof of fact of the judgment, it may be
made in a special proceeding for cancellation or
correction of entries in the civil registry under Rule
108 of the Rules of Court. In Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas
(628 SCRA 266 [201 O]) this Court declared that
"[t]he recognition of the foreign divorce decree may
be made in a R 108 proceeding itself, as the object
of special proceedings (such as that in Rule 108 of
the Rules of Court) is precisely to establish the

6

J9JC9B0M

RULE 72
Subject Matter And Applicability Of General Rules

status or right of a party or a particular fact." (Fujiki
v. Marinay, 26 June 2013, Carpio, J.).
Q.

Frank and Gina were married on 12 June 1987 in
Manila. Barely a year after the wedding, Frank
exhibited a violent temperamentforcing Gina, for
reasons of personal safety, to live with her
parents.A year thereafter,Gina found employment
as a domestic helper in Singapore, where she
worked for ten consecutive years. All the time
she was abroad, Gina had absolutely no
communicationswith Frank, nor did she hear any
news about him. While in Singapore, Gina met
and fell in love with Willie.
On 4 July 2007,Gina filed a petition with the
RTC of Manila to declare Frank presumptively
dead, so that she could marry Willie. The RTC
granted Gina's petition. The Office of the Solicitor
General (OSG)filed a Notice of Appeal with the
RTC,stating that it was appealingthe decision.to
the Court of Appealson questionsof law and fact.
a) Is a petition for Declaration of Presumptive
Deatha special proceeding?Why or why not?
b) As the RTCjudge who granted Gina's Petition,
will you give due course to the OSG's Notice
of Appeal?Why or why not? (09 Bar Q5)

A.
a)

No, a petition for declaration of presumptive
death is not a special proceeding.

The Supreme Court has held that such a petition
is not a special proceeding since it is not mentioned in
the enumeration of special proceedings in S1 R72.
(Republic v. Jomoc, G.R. 163604, 6 May 2005).

7

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Note: It is submitted that a petition for declaration
of presumptive death is a special proceeding for it is a
remedy by which a party seeks to establish a status or
particular fact, i.e., the fact (albeit presumptive) of
death. It is similar to the petition for declaration of
absence under R107. The enumeration in 81 R72
should not be considered as exclusive. For instance,
the petition for a writ of amparo is not included in 81
R72 but it is evidently a special proceeding for it seeks
to establish a civil right.
b) As the RTC judge who granted Gina's petition, I will
not give due course to the OSG's Notice of Appeal.
The Supreme Court has held that the judgment
of the court in a petition for declaration of presumptive
death is immediately final and executory pursuant to
Article 247 of the Family Code. Hence such a
judgment may not be appealed. (Republic v.
Bermudez-Lorino, G.R. 160258, 19 January 2005).1
Q.

In April 2012, petitioner Estrellita Matias filed
with the RTC of Tarlac City a petition for the
declaration of the presumptive death of her
husband Wilfredo Matias, a member of the
Philippine Constabulary, who has been missing
and never heard from since 1979, after never
coming back from his tour of duty. The purpose
of the declaration of presumptive death is to
claim death benefits from the government. The
petition was docketed as Special Proceeding
No. 4850. The RTC rendered judgment declaring

11n
Republic v. Jomoc, 6 May 2005, from whose facts the bar problem was
based, it was ruled that the trial court should give due course to the notice of appeal,
since a petition for declaration of presumptive death is not a special proceedingand
hence a record on appeal is not required for appealing from a judgment therein.
Jomoc overlooked that decisions in summary judicial proceedings under the Family
Code are immediatelyfinal and executory. (Art. 247, Family Code).

8

J9JC9B0M

RULE 72
Subject Matter And Applicability Of General Rules

Wilfredo absent or presumptively dead under
Article 41 of the Family Code for purposes of
claiming financial benefits due him as a former
military officer. The Republic questioned the
RTC decision via a petition for certiorari. May
the RTC decision be set aside?
A.

Yes. Firstly the citation in the decision of Article 41
of the Family Code is erroneous since the
petitioner's purpose in seeking such declaration was
not for purposes of remarriage but for purposes of
claiming death benefits from the government.
The petition should have been dismissed outright
since in our jurisdiction a petition whose sole objective is
to have a person declared presumptively dead under
Articles 390 and 391 of the Civil Code is not a valid suit
and no court has any authority to take cognizance of the
same. The reason is that since Articles 390 and 391
merely express evidentiary presumptions, an action
brought exclusively to declare a person presumptively
dead pursuant thereto presents no actual controversy
that a court may decide.
The SC stressed that the presumptions under
Articles 390 and 391 arise by operation of law,
without need of court declaration, once the factual
conditions in said articles are established. (TadeoMatias v. Republic, 25 April 2018, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Sal Mineo died intestate, leaving a P1 billion
estate. He was survived by his wife Dayanara
and their five children.
Dayanara filed a petition for the issuance of
letters of administration. Charlene, one of the
children, filed an opposition to the petition,
alleging that there was neither an allegation nor

9

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

genuine effort to settle the estate amicably
before the filing of the petition. Rule on the
opposition.(10 Bar Q16)
A.

The opposition should be denied.
The Supreme Court has held that Article 151 of
the Family Code, which requires that in suits
involving the members of the same family there must
be a verified allegation of earnest efforts at
compromise, applies only to suits or ordinary civil
actions but not to a special proceeding, like a
petition for settlement of estate, which is simply for
the establishment of a status, a right, or a particular
fact. (Manalo v. Court of Appeals, 16 January 2001 ).

Q.

What provisionsgovern special proceedings?

A.

Special proceedings are primarily governed by the
special provisions applicable to them. In the absence
of special provisions, the rules provided for in
ordinary actions shall be, as far as practicable,
applicable in special proceedings. (S2 R72).

10

J9JC9B0M

SETTLEMENT OF ESTATE
OF DECEASED PERSONS
RULE 73. VENUE AND PROCESS
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over a proceeding
for the settlement of the estate of a deceased
person?

A.

The Regional Trial Court has jurisdiction over
proceedings for the settlement of the estate of a
deceased person (probate proceedings) where the
gross value of the estate exceeds P300,000 and in
Metro Manila where the gross value of the estate
exceeds P400,000. (819[4] BP Big. 129). Where
the gross value does not exceed P300,000 or
P400,000 it would be the Municipal Trial Court
which would have jurisdiction.

Q.

A petition for allowance of a holographic will
was filed with the RTC. The petition did not
allege the gross value of the estate. The RTC's
decision was appealedto the Court of Appeals
and the latter's decision was appealed to the
Supreme Court. Neither the parties nor the
lower courts delved on the issue of jurisdiction.
May the Supreme Court motu proprio dismiss
the case on the ground of lack of jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. The jurisdiction of a court is determined from the
allegations in the complaint or petition. Since the petition
did not aver the gross value of the estate, the RTC did
not acquire jurisdiction over the case. A court may motu
proprio dismiss a case on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction, whether at the first instance or on appeal.
(Frianela v. Banayad, G.R. 169700, 30 July 2009).
11

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

H and W are husband and wife. H died. The
value of their community property is P500,000
while the value of H's estate is P250,000. Which
court would have jurisdiction over the petition
for the settlement of H's estate?

A.

It is submitted that the RTC has jurisdiction. It is the
total value of the absolute community property and
not only the value of the share of the decedent,
which should furnish the jurisdictional test. Under
82 R73, "[w]hen the marriage is dissolved by the
death of the husband or wife, the community
property shall be inventoried, administered, and
liquidated, and the debts thereof paid, in the testate.
or intestate proceedings of the deceased spouse."
In other words, the settlement proceedings will
necessarily entail the dissolution and settlement of
the absolute community and the property thereof.
(See 1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 46 [?1h rev. ed.], citing
Fernandez v. Maravilla, 119 Phil. 860).

Q.

What is the
proceedings?

initiatory pleading

in probate

A.
1) If a person dies testate, the initiatory pleading is a:
1.1 Petition for allowance of will and for letters
testamentary if there is an executor appointed in
the will, or
1.2 Petition for allowance of will and for letters
of administration with the will annexed, in case
there is a will but there is no executor named in the
will or the executor named in the will is incompetent
or refuses to serve as such.

12

J9JC9B0M

RULE 73
Venue and Process

2) If a person dies intestate, the initiatory pleading
is a petition for letters of administration.
Q.

Who is an executor?

A.

An executor is the person named in the will to
administer the decedent's estate and carry out the
provisions thereof.

Q.

Who is an administrator?

A.

An administrator is the person appointed by the
court to administer the estate where the decedent
died intestate, or where the will was void and not
allowed to probate, or where no executor was
named in the will or the executor named therein is
incompetent, refuses the trust, or fails to give a
Qond. (BIRNI)

Q.

What is the venue of probate proceedings?

A.

If the decedent is a resident, venue lies with the
RTC or MTC where the decedent resided at the
time of his death. If the decedent is a non-resident,
venue is RTC/MTC of any place where he had
estate. (S1 R73).

Q.

Pedrillo, a Fil-Am permanent resident of Los
Angeles, California at the time of his death,
bequeathed to Winston a sum of money to
purchase an annuity. Upon Pedrillo's demise,
his will was duly probated in Los Angeles and
the specified sum in the will was in fact used to
purchasean annuity with XYZ of Hong Kong so
that Winston would receive the equivalent of
US$1,000per month for the next 15 years.
Wanting to receive the principal amount of
the annuity, Winston files for the probate of
13

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Pedrillo's will in the Makati RTC. As prayed for,
the court names Winston as administrator of
the estate.
Winston now files in the Makati RTC a
motion to compel XYZ to account for all sums in
its possession forming part of Pedrillo's estate.
Rule on the motion. (10 Bar Q15)
A.

The motion should be denied. The Supreme Court
has held that the writs and processes of a probate
court cannot extend outside the Philippines. Here
XYZ was in Hong Kong and thus beyond the
jurisdiction of the Philippine probate court.
Moreover the probate court should have
dismissed the petition at the onset. In a petition for
probate of a will where the testator is a nonresident, the petition should allege the jurisdictional
fact that the testator left estate within the
Philippines. (Cuenca v. Court of Appeals, L-24742,
26 October 1973).

Q.

What is the rule of preferential jurisdiction?

A.

It is the rule where the court first taking cognizance of
the settlement of the estate of a decedent shall
exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other
courts. (S1 R73). While S1 R73 speaks of
"jurisdiction" what it actually refers to is venue.

Q.

David, a resident of Catarman, Northern Samar,
died. Intestate proceedings were filed by an heir
in the RTC of Quezon City where the great bulk
of David's property is situated. Subsequently a
testate proceeding was filed in the RTC of
Catarman. The records clearly show that David
is a resident of Catarman. The heir moved

14

J9JC9B0M

RULE 73
Venue and Process

to dismiss the probate proceeding filed in
Catarman citing the rule of preferential
jurisdiction which states that the court first
taking cognizance of a probate proceeding shall
exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other
courts. Is the heir's contention correct?
A.

No. The rule of preferential jurisdiction applies only
to a non-resident decedent, in which case the
venue is the RTC/MTC of any place where the
decedent had estate. Where the decedent is a
resident, the venue of a probate proceeding lies
with the RTC/MTC where he resided at the time of
his death. Moreover testate proceedings take
preference over an intestate proceeding. (Cuenca
v. CA, 26 Oct 73).

Q.

Petitioner Vicente Uriarte filed with the RTC of
Negros Oriental a petition for the settlement of
the estate of the late Don Juan Uriarte y Goite
(Special Proceeding No. 6344) alleging therein,
inter alia, that, as a natural son of the latter. Don
Uriarte is a non-resident with properties in
Negros Oriental and Manila.
Subsequently,Higinio Uriarte,one of the two
private respondents herein,filed an opposition to
the petition in S.P. No. 6344alleging that he was a
nephewof the deceasedJuan Uriarte y Goite who
had "executed a Last Will and Testament in
Spain, a duly authenticated copy whereof has
been requested and which shall be submitted to
this Honorable Court upon receipt thereof," and
further questioning petitioner's capacity and
interestto commencethe intestateproceeding.

15

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Then, Juan Uriarte Zamacona, the other
private respondent,commencedSpecial Proceeding
No. 51396 in the RTC of Manila for the probate of
the will of the deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite, and
on the same date he filed in Special Proceeding
No. 6344 of the Negros Court a motion to dismiss
the same on the following grounds: (1) that, as the
deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite had left a last will,
there was no legal basis to proceed with said
intestate proceedings, and (2) that petitioner
Vicente Uriarte had no legal personality and
interest to initiate said intestate proceedings, he
not being an acknowledged natural son of the
decedent. A copy of the Petition for Probate and
of the alleged Will were attached to the Motion to
Dismiss. Petitioner opposed the aforesaid motion
to dismiss contending that, as the Negros Court
was first to take cognizance of the settlement of
the estate of the deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite, it
had acquired exclusive jurisdiction over the same
pursuant to 51 R73.
The Negros Court sustained Juan Uriarte
Zamacona's motion to dismiss and dismissed the
Special Proceeding No. 6344 pending before it.
Did the Negros Court erred in dismissing
Special Proceeding No. 6644,on the one hand, and
on the other, did the Manila Court similarly erred in
not dismissing Special Proceeding No. 51396
notwithstanding proof of the prior filing of Special
Proceeding No. 6344 in the Negros Court?
A.

Yes both the Negros Court and the Manila Court
erred in their respective rulings.

16

J9JC9B0M

RULE 73
Venue and Process

Under the rule of preferential jurisdiction in
case of a non-resident decedent, the court first
taking cognizance of the settlement of the estate of
the decedent shall exercise jurisdiction to the
exclusion of all other courts. (S1 R73).
Here the petition for settlement of estate was
first filed in Negros Oriental and hence it shall
exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other
courts. The ground for dismissal here is not lack of
jurisdiction but lack of venue.
While it is true that probate proceedings shall
take precedence over intestate proceedings, this
rule should be taken in conjunction with the rule on
preferential jurisdiction. It is not in accord with
public policy and the orderly and inexpensive
administration of justice to unnecessarily multiply
litigation, especially if several courts would be
involved. This, in effect, was the result of the
submission of the will aforesaid to the Manila Court.
Thus Juan Uriarte Zamacona should have
submitted the will for probate to the Negros Court,
either in a separate special proceeding or in . an
appropriate petition for said purpose filed in the
already pending Special Proceeding No. 6344.
(Uriarte v. Court of First Instance of Negros Occ.,
33 SCRA 252 [1970]).2
Q.

Dencio was a long-time resident of Lipa City,
Batangas. He became ill however and had to go
to Manila for medical treatment. While in Manila,
Dencio stayed at the house of his son, Andres.

2The
Court however held that Petitioner waived the objection of improper
venue when he filed the motion to dismiss only after seven months from the time
he had notice of the Manila Case. (At p. 261 ).

17

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Three months later, Dencio died in the hospital
in Manilawhere he was being treated. His gross
estate amounted to P5 million. What is the
proper venue for the petition for the probate of
Dencio's will?
A.

In the RTC of Manila. "Resides" in S1 R73 means
actual residence or place of abode and not domicile
or legal residence. (Fule v. CA, 74 SCRA 189).
Here Dencio at the time of his demise was actually
residing in Manila.

Q.

The petition for letters of administration over
the estate of Felicisimo San Luis, the former
governor of Laguna, was filed in the RTC of
Makati (which had jurisdiction then over
Muntinlupa) by his widow Felicidad.She prayed
that the conjugal partnership be dissolved, that
letters of administration issue to her, and that
the estate of Felicisimo be settled. The petition
alleged that Felicisimo resided in New Alabang
Village, Muntinlupa. One of the children of
Felicisimo by his first marriage moved to
dismiss on the ground that the venue should be
in Laguna. The probate court dismissed the
petition on the ground of improper venue. It
held that at the time of his death Felicisimowas
the duly elected governor and a resident of the
province of Laguna,and that the petition should
be filed in Sta. Cruz, Laguna where he had his
official residence. Was the dismissal correct?

A.

No. The term "resides" in S1 R73 connotes "actual
residence" as distinguished from "legal residence"
or "domicile." There is a distinction between
"residence" for purposes of election laws and
"residence" for purposes of fixing the venue of
18

J9JC9B0M

RULE 73
Venue and Process

actions. "Residence" for purposes of election laws
is synonymous with "domicile." Residence however
in 81 R73 simply means actual residence or
physical habitation, without regard to animus
revertendi. At the time of his death, Felicisimo was
actually residing at New Alabang Village, not in Sta.
Cruz, Laguna. (San Luis v. San Luis, G.R. No.
133743, 6 February 2007).
Q.

How is venue challenged or contested in a
probate proceeding?

A.

The venue of probate proceeding can only be
questioned on appeal, but certiorari under R65 may
be resorted to if the impropriety of the venue. (due
to residence or location of estate) appears on the
record. (81 R73; Manzanero v. CF/, 61 Phil. 850).

Q.

If settlement proceedings are filed in two or
more courts and the question of venue is
raised, which courtwould have the jurisdiction
to decide the issue of venue?

A.

The court in which the case was first filed has
exclusive jurisdiction to decide the issue of venue.
(De Borja v. Tan, 27 July 1955).

Q.

If a spouse has died, in what proceeding is the
community property or conjugal partnership
liquidated?What if both spouses have died?

A.

When the marriage is dissolved by the death of the
husband or wife, the community property shall be
inventoried, administered, and liquidated, and the debts
thereof paid, in the testate or intestate proceedings of
the deceased spouse. If both spouses have died, the
conjugal partnership shall be liquidated in the testate or
intestate proceedings of either. (82 R73).
19

J9JC9B0M

RULE 7 4. SUMMARY SETTLEMENT
OF ESTATES
Summary settlement of estates of small value
Q.

What do you mean by summary settlement of
estates of small value?

A.

It is the procedure provided for in R74 for the
summary settlement of estate (whether testate or
intestate) whose gross value does not exceed
P10,000. The. MTC. has jurisdiction over a petition
for summary settlement.

Q.

Describe briefly the procedure in summary
settlement of estates of small value.

A.
1) Filing of a petition with the MTC showing that
the gross value of the estate does not exceed
P10,000.
2) Publication of a notice of hearing once a week
for 3 consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the province. (1 x 3)
3) Hearing on the petition shall be held not less than 1
month nor more than 3 months from the date of the
last publication of the notice and after such notice
to interested persons as the court may direct.
4) The court may proceed summarily without the
appointment of an executor or administrator to
grant if proper the allowance of the will, the
determination of the heirs and the persons
legally entitled to participate in the estate, and,
after the payment of debts, to divide and
distribute the estate. (S2 R74).

20

J9JC9B0M

RULE 74
Summary Settlement Of Estates

Extrajudicial settlement of estates
Q.

May the heirs by agreement extrajudicially
settle the estate?

A.

Yes, subject to the requirements under R74.

Q.

What are the requirements in order that the
heirs may extrajudicially
settle the estate?

A.
1) The decedent left no will and no debts.
2) The heirs are all of age or the minors are
represented
by their
judicial
or
legal
representatives duly authorized for the purpose.
Q.

Describe briefly the procedure in extrajudicial
settlement.

A.
1) The parties may divide the estate among
themselves by means of a public instrument filed
with the register of deeds, and should they disagree
they may do so in an ordinary action of partition.
2) If there is only one heir, he may adjudicate to
himself the entire estate by means of an
affidavit filed with the register of deeds.
(Affidavit of self-adjudication).
3) The parties to the extrajudicial settlement
(whether by public instrument or by stipulation
in a pending action for partition, or the sole heir
who adjudicates the entire estate to himself by
means of an affidavit) shall file a bond with the
register of deeds in an amount equivalent to the
value of the personal property involved.
21

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

4) The fact of the extrajudicial settlement or
administration shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the province once a
week for 3 consecutive weeks (1 x 3).
Q.

Where the estate consists only of personal
property, is there still a need to file the
extrajudicialsettlementwith the registerof deeds?

A.

Yes. The instrument is presented not for registration
but for file purposes only. (NARCISO PENA,
REGISTRATION OF LAND TITLES AND DEEDS
564 [1982 rev. ed.], citing LRC Consulta No. 114,
22 Sep 1956). If the estate includes real property,
then the instrument should be registered pursuant
to Section 86 of the Property Registration Decree.

Q.

Upon publication, is the extrajudicial settlement
binding upon all persons?

A.

No. The extrajudicial settlement shall not be binding
upon any person who has not participated therein
or had no notice thereof. (S1 R74).

Q.

Describe in brief the requirement of a bond in
extrajudicial settlement.

A.

The bond is required only if there is personal property
in the decedent's estate. It is not required if the
decedent left only real property since in such case it is
the lien under S4 R? 4 which would serve as protection
to the heirs or persons entitled to the estate.
The bond is filed simultaneously and as a
condition precedent to the filing of the public
instrument, or stipulation in the action for partition,
or of the affidavit in the register of deeds. The bond
is conditioned upon the payment of any just claim
under S4 R74.

22

J9JC9B0M

RULE 74
Summary Settlement Of Estates

Q.

What is the presumption if no creditorfiles a
petition for letters of administration within 2
years after the death of the decedent?

A.

It shall be presumed that the decedent left no debts
(81 R74). This presumption is rebuttable.

Q.

May the distributees and the estate be held
liable after the settlement and the distributionof
the estate?

A.

Yes. If within 2 years after an extrajudicial settlement or
summary settlement and distribution of an estate, it
shall appear than an heir or other person has been
unduly deprived of his lawful participation in the estate,
such heir or person may compel the settlement of the
estate in the courts for the purpose of satisfying such
lawful participation. (84 R74). This involves the
cancellation of the partition and the making of a new
division, unless the deprived heir or other person
agrees to be paid the value of his participation with
interest. (3 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON
THE RULES OF COURT 400 [1980 ed.]).
If within the same 2-year period, it shall appear
that there are debts outstanding against the estate or
that an heir or other person has been unduly deprived
of his lawful participation payable in money, the court
having jurisdiction of the estate may after hearing
settle the amount of such debts or lawful participation
and order how much and in what manner each
distributee shall contribute in the payment thereof,
and may issue execution against the bond or the real
estate belonging to the deceased or both. (84 R74).
Here the procedure is not to cancel the partition but
for the court to fix the amount of the lawful
participation in money. (Id. 400-401 ).

23

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Within what period may the bond and the real
estate remain charged with a liability to creditors,
heirs, or other persons?

A.

The bond and real estate shall remain charged with
a liability to creditors, heirs, or other persons for a
period of 2 years after such distribution,
notwithstanding any transfers of real estate that
may have been made. (S4 R74).
If on the date of the expiration of the 2-year
period the person authorized to file a claim is a
minor or mentally incapacitated, or is in prison or
outside of the Philippines (MIPO), he may present
his claim within 1 year after such disability is
removed. (S5 R74).

Q.

What is the duty of the register of deeds when a
deed of extrajudicial settlement has been duly
registered?

A.

The register of deeds shall annotate on the proper
title the 2-year lien mentioned in S4 R74. Upon the
expiration of the 2-year period and presentation of
a verified petition by the registered heirs, devisees
or legatees or any other party in interest that no
claim of any creditor, heir, or other person exists,
the register of deeds shall cancel the 2-year lien
noted on the title without the necessity of a court
order. (Sec. 86, Property Registration Decree).

Q.

When is the
commence?

A.

In the case of registered land, the period is deemed-fa
commence not from the date of the execution of the
instrument but from the date of registration thereof,
since it is the registration that gives constructive

two-year

24

period

deemed

to

J9JC9B0M

RULE 74
Summary Settlement Of Estates

notice to third persons of the existing settlement of
estate. (Section 52, Property Registration Decree;
NARCISO PENA, REGISTRATION OF LAND
TITLES AND DEEDS 564 [1982 rev. ed.], citing LRC
Consulta No. 93, 7 June 1956). In case of
unregistered land and other property, the two-year
period is reckoned from the settlement and
distributionof the estate in accordancewith 84 R74.
Q.

B bought a property whose title still had the 2-year
lien annotated upon it, although more than two
years had already expired from the registration of
the extrajudicial settlement. Is the property bought
by B still bound by the 2-year lien?

A.

No more. The 84 R74 lien expires after 2 years and
becomes functus oficio. A buyer who purchases
thereafter is in good faith. (Carreon v. Agcaoili, L11156,23 February1961 ).

Q.

B, C, and D are the sole heirs of the deceased X.
The estate of X consists of Lot 1. C and D went
to the United States in 2000. In 2001, B executed
and registered an affidavit of self-adjudication
wherein he adjudicated Lot 1 to himself and a
title over Lot 1 in the name of B was issued by
the register of deeds. In 2009, C and D came
back. Can they still file a petition to settle the
estate of X in order to obtain their lawful shares?

A.

Yes, provided they do so within one year from
arrival in the Philippines. If on the date of the
expiration of the 2-year lien, the person authorized
to file a claim is a minor, mentally incapacitated, is
in prison, or outside of the Philippines, he may
present his claim within one year after such
disability is removed. (S5 R74).
25

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

B, C, and D are the sole heirs of the deceased X.
The estate of X consists of Lot 1 situated in their
home province of Surigao del Norte. C and D
went to Manila in 2000. In 2001, B executed and
registered an affidavit of self-adjudication
wherein he adjudicated Lot 1 to himself and a title
over Lot 1 was issued by the register of deeds in
the name of B. In 2009, C and D came back. Can
they still file a petition to settle the estate of X in
order to obtain their lawful shares?

A.

No more. The two-year period under S4 R74 had
already expired.

Q.

What if any would be the remedy of C and D?
What is the prescriptive period for bringing
such a remedy?

A.

C and D can still file an action for reconveyance
based on implied trust under Article 1456 of the
Civil Code which provides that if property is
acquired through fraud, the person obtaining it is by
force of law considered a trustee of an implied trust
for the benefit of the person from whom the
property comes. The action should be brought
within 10 years from the registration of the title in
the name of B (Article 1144, Civil Code) and
provided that the property has not been acquired by
an innocent purchaser for value.

Q.

Pinoy died without a will. His wife, Rosie and
three children executed a deed of extrajudicial
settlement of his estate. The deed was properly
published and registered with the Register of
Deeds.3 Three years thereafter, Suzie appeared,

3There
is an imperfection in the question. What is published is not the
instrument but the fact of the extrajudicial settlement. (81 R74).

26

J9JC9B0M

RULE 74
Summary Settlement Of Estates

claiming to be the illegitimatechild of Pinoy. She
sought to annul the settlementclaiming she was
deprivedof her rightful share in the estate.
Rosie and the three children contendedthat
(1) the publication of the deed constituted
constructive notice to the whole world and
should thereforebind Suzy; and (2) Suzy's action
had already prescribed.Are Rosie and the three
children correct? Explain. (09Bar Qll-18)
A.

Rosie and her three children are not correct.
The publication of the deed of extrajudicial
partition does not constitute constructive notice to
the whole world since S1 R74 provides that "no
extrajudicial settlement shall be binding upon any
person who has not participated therein or had no
notice thereof."
Suzy's action has not prescribed. Her action to
annul the settlement is in effect an action for
reconveyance which may be filed within 10 years
from the issuance of the title. Here only 3 years had
lapsed; hence Suzy's action has not yet prescribed.

Q.

If a decedent died without will and without
debts, are his heirs under legal obligation to
submit his estate to a special proceeding for
settlement of intestate estate?

A.

No. In fact, the heirs are encouraged to have the
same partitioned, judicially
or extrajudicially.
(Butiong v. Plaza, 5 August 2015, Peralta, J.)

27

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Kuya and Diko filed a complaint for partition of
their deceased father's estate against their
sisters, Ate and Ditse. The brothers allegedthat
the four of them are the only heirs of their
deceasedfather; that they could not agreeas to
how their father's estate should be divided; that
their father left no will and that he left no debts
whatsoever.
Ate and Ditse filed a motion to dismiss
insisting that the proper action should be a
petitionfor the issuanceof lettersof administration
and not an action for partition. Is the motion
meritorious? Explain. (86Bar Q14ed).

A.

No, the motion to dismiss is not meritorious. Under
the Law on Partition, the estate of a deceased
person may properly be partitioned since a coownership has arisen among the deceased's heirs,
provided that the deceased died intestate and left
no debts. A petition for issuance of letters of
administration is only an option to settle the estate
and is not mandatory. In fact the heirs in such a
case are encouraged to have the estate partitioned,
whether judicially or extrajudicially, as this is less
expensive than a probate proceeding. (Butiong v.
Plaza, 5 August 2015, Peralta, J.).

28

J9JC9B0M

RULE 75. PRODUCTION OF WILL;
ALLOWANCE OF WILL NECESSARY
Q.

Outline in brief the judicial proceedings for the
settlement of the estate of a deceased person.
(INA LC PDC)

A.
1) FILING OF THE INITIATORY PLEADING; i.e.,
petition for allowance of will or petition for letters
testamentary.
2) NOTICE OF HEARING. The court shall issue a
notice of hearing. Publication 1 X 3 and personal
notice to known heirs, legatees, devisees, and
executor.
3) ALLOWANCE/DISALLOWANCE
OF
WILL
(PROBATE PROPER). Proof of will. Necessary
quantum of evidence if uncontested or contested
and in cases of lost or destroyed will.
4) ISSUANCE OF LETTERS TESTAMENTARY/OF
ADMINISTRATION.
When the will has been
proved and allowed, the court shall issue letters
testamentary to the person named as executor in
the will. In intestate proceedings, after the
publication of the notice of the hearing and after
the hearing, the court shall issue letters of
administration to the person it finds competent.
5) FILING AND APPROVAL OF CLAIMS AGAINST
ESTATE. Money claims filed against the estate.
(R86). Non-money claims filed against the
executor or administrator in ordinary action. (R87).

29

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

6) PAYMENT OF DEBTS, ETC. Payment of debts,
estate tax, funeral charges, administration
expenses, and allowance to the widow and
minor or incapacitated children.
7) DETERMINATION OF HEIRS AND DISTRIBUTION.
Court issues order determining the heirs and
distributing the remainder of the estate.
8) CLOSURE. Proceedings deemed terminated
only after payment of all debts and delivery of
the remaining estate to the heirs.
Q.

May a will pass personal and real property
without being probated?

A.

No. No will shall pass either real or personal estate
unless it is proved and allowed in the proper court.
(S1 R75).

Q.

After Lulu's death, her heirs brought her last will
to a lawyer to obtain their respective shares in the
estate. The lawyer prepared a deed of partition
distributing Lulu's estate in accordance with the
terms of her will. Is the act of the lawyer correct?
Why? (05 Bar Q5[1]).

A.

No, the act of the lawyer is not correct.
Under S1 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in
the proper court. The Supreme Court has held that
the probate of a will is mandatory. ( Guevarra v.
Guevarra, 74 Phil. 749). Extrajudicial settlement is
not proper if the decedent left a will. (S1 R74).

Q.

The heirs of H agree among themselves that
they will honor the division of H's estate as
indicated in her Last Will and Testament. To

30

J9JC9B0M

RULE 75
Production Of Will; Allowance Of Will Necessary

avoid the expenseof going to court in a Petition
for Probate of the Will, can they instead execute
an Extrajudicial Settlement Agreement among
themselves? Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q8b).
A.

No, the heirs of H cannot execute an extrajudicial
settlement.
Under 81 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in
the proper court. The Supreme Court has held that
the probate of a will is mandatory. ( Guevarra v.
Guevarra, 74 Phil. 749). Extrajudicial settlement is
not proper if the decedent left a will. (S 1 R74 ).

Q.

The last will and testament of the deceasedwas
presented in the proceedingto settle his estate
and in due course hearingwas set for the probate
of the will. Before evidence thereon could be
presented,the legal heirs of the deceased, his
widow and two surviving daughters, filed a
manifestationthat the probate of the will would
no longer be necessary since they had already
agreed to divide the net estate differently in
accordancewith a project of partition attachedto
their manifestation. Consequently, they moved
that the project of partition be approved and
forthwith implemented without probate of the
decedent'swill. Should the court grant the heirs'
motion and accordingly approve their project of
partition without probate of the will? Explain.
(92Bar Q9).

A.

No, the heirs of H cannot execute an extrajudicial
settlement.

31

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Under 81 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in the
proper court. The Supreme Court has held that the
probate of a will is mandatory. ( Guevarra v. Guevarra,
74 Phil. 749). Partitioning the estate without probating
the will is thus improper, regardless of whether the
partition would or would not be in accordance with the
provisions of the will. (81 R74).
Q.

The will of a deceased wife was allowed probate
upon the petition of the executor, her husband, and
the estate of the wife distributed in accordance with
the will. Two years later, the husband was charged
with the crime of falsification for allegedly forging
the signature of the wife in the will. Will the charge
prosper? (99 Bar Q11 b).

A.

No. Subject to the right of appeal, the allowance of the
shall be conclusive as to its due execution. (81 R75).
Here since the order allowing the will became final, the
same became conclusive as to the due execution of
the will. (Mercado v. Santos, 66 Phil. 215).

Q.

What is the duty of the custodian of a will after
he knows of the testator's death?

A.

The person who has custody of a will shall, within
20 days after he knows of the testator's death,
deliver the will to the court having jurisdiction or to
the executor named in the will. (82 R75).

Q.

What is the duty of the person named as
executor in the will after he knows of the
testator's death or after he knows that he was
named as the executor?

32

J9JC9B0M

RULE 75
Production Of Will; Allowance Of Will Necessary

A.

A person named as executor in a will, shall within
20 days:
1) After he knows of the testator's death, or
2) After he knows that he is named executor if he
obtained such knowledge after the death of the
testator,
Present such will to the court having jurisdiction,
unless the will has reached the court in any other
manner, and shall, within such period, signify to the
court in writing his acceptance or refusal of the
trust. (83 R75).

Q.

X has custody of the will of the deceasedD.
Although he knew of D's death, he failed, within
20 days from such knowledge, to deliver the
same to the probate court or to the executor
namedin the will. MayX be committedto prison?

A.

No. X may however be fined not exceeding P2,000
if he is unable to proffer a satisfactory excuse to the
court. X may be committed to prison only if he was
ordered by the probate court to deliver the will and
he neglects without reasonable cause to do so.
(84&5 R76).

Q.

Alleging that his father passed away in 1992
leaving a holographic will, which is now in the
custody of his mother, Nixon filed with the RTC
a petition for mandamus with damages to
compel his mother to produce the will so that
probate proceedings for the allowance of the
will could be instituted. Was the filing of the
petition for mandamusproper?

33

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. This is because there is a plain, speedy, and
adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law, that
is, the filing of a petition for probate under S1 R76
and then moving for the production of the will under
S2-5 R75. Under S1 R76, an interested person may
petition the court having jurisdiction to have the will
allowed, whether the same be in his possession or
not, or is lost or destroyed. (Uy v. Lee, G.R. No.
176831, 15 January 2010). It also appears that
Nixon had a photocopy of the will. This would have
been sufficient to prove the holographic will.

34

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76. ALLOWANCE OR
DISALLOWANCE OF WILL
Q.

Who may petition for the allowance of a will?
(LIED T)

A.

Any executor, devisee, or legatee named in a will,
or any other person interested in the estate, may, at
any time after the death of the testator, petition the
court having jurisdiction to have the will allowed.
The testator himself may, during his lifetime,
petition the court for the allowance of the will. This
is known as an ante-mortem probate. (S1 R76).

Q.

Aside from the executor, devisee, or legatee,
who else are interested in the estate?

A.

A creditor of the decedent is an interested person.
An heir is an interested person but one who has
assigned or renounced his hereditary rights has no
legal interest as would authorize him to initiate
probate proceedings. (Duran v. Duran, L-23372, 14
June 1967).

Q.

May an interested person petition for the
allowance of the will even if he does not have
possession of the will or even if the will is lost
or destroyed?

A.

Yes. (S1 R76).

Q.

What are the contents of a petition for the
allowance of a will?

A.

A petition for the allowance of a will must show, so
far as known to the petitioner: (JuN ValeC)

35

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

1) The jurisdictional facts;
2) The names, ages, and residence of the heirs,
legatees, and devisees of the testator or decedent;
3) The probable value
property of the estate;

and character

of the

4) The name of the person for whom letters are
prayed; and
5) If the will has not been delivered to the court,
the name of the will's custodian. (S2 R76).
Q.

What are the jurisdictional facts required to be
alleged in the petition for probate of a will?
(RED Value)

A.
(a) That a person died leaving a will.
(b) That, in the case of a resident, he died in his
residence within the territorial jurisdiction of the
court, or, in the case of a non-resident, that he
left an estate within such territorial jurisdiction.
(Palaganas v. Palaganas, 26 January 2011 ).
(c) The gross value of the estate. (Friane/a v.
Banayad, 30 July 2009).
Q.

Pedrillo, a Fil-Am permanent resident of Los
Angeles, California at the time of his death,
bequeathed to Winston a sum of money to
purchase an annuity. Upon Pedrillo's demise,
his will was duly probated in Los Angeles and
the specified sum in the will was in fact used to
purchase an annuity with XYZ of Hong Kong so
that Winston would receive the equivalent of
US$1,000 per month for the next 15 years.

36

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

Wanting to receive the principal amount of
the annuity, Winston files for the probate of
Pedrillo's will in the Makati RTC.As prayed for,
the court names Winston as administrator of
the estate.
Winston now files in the Makati RTC a
motion to compel XYZto account for all sums in
its possession forming part of Pedrillo's estate.
Rule on the motion. (10 Bar Q15)
A.

The motion should be denied. The Supreme Court
has held that the writs and processes of a probate
court cannot extend outside the Philippines. Here
XYZ was in Hong Kong and thus beyond the
jurisdiction of the Philippine probate court.
Moreover the probate court should have
dismissed the petition at the onset. In a petition for
probate of a will where the testator is a non-resident,
the petition should allege the jurisdictional fact that
the testator left estate within the Philippines.( Cuenca
v. Court of Appeals, L-24742,26 October 1973).

Q.

Will a defect in the petition render void the
allowanceof the will?

A.

No. No defect in the petition shall render void the
allowance of the will, or the issuance of letters
testamentary or of administration with the will
annexed. (S2 R76).

Q.

When a will is delivered to or a petition for the
allowance of the will is filed in the probate
court, what shall the court do?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for proving the will
when all concerned may appear to contest the
allowance thereof, and shall cause notice of such

37

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

time and place to be published 3 weeks successively,
previous to the time appointed, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the province. (83 R76).
Q.

When shall newspaper publicationnot be made?

A.

No newspaper publication shall be made where the
petition for probate has been filed by the testator
himself. (S3 R76).

Q.

Is notice of the hearing required to be mailed or
personallyserved? If so to whom?

A.

Yes, in the situation provided for by 84 R76. Such
notice shall be given as follows:
NOTICE BY MAIL. The court shall cause copies
of the notice of the time and place fixed for proving
the will to be addressed to the designated or other
known heirs, legatees, and devisees of the testator
resident in the Philippines at their places of
residence, and deposited in the post office with the
postage thereon prepaid at least 20 days before the
hearing, if such places of residence be known.
A copy of the notice must in like manner be
mailed to the person named as executor, if he be
not the petitioner; also, to any person named as coexecutor not petitioning, if their places of residence
be known.4
PERSONAL SERVICE. Personal service of
copies of the notice at least 10 days before the
hearing shall be equivalent to mailing. (S4 R76).

"Compare with 84 R79, where notice is required to be given to the known
heirs, creditors, and other persons believed to have an interest in the estate.

38

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

Q.

When shall personal notice be sent only to the
compulsory heirs?

A.

If the testator asks for the allowance of his own will,
personal notice shall be sent only to the compulsory
heirs. (S4 R76). No newspaper publication shall be
made. (S3 R76).

Q.

What must be shown before the introduction of
testimony in support of the will?

A.

There must be a showing of compliance with the
provisions of S3 and S4 R76 regarding publication
and notice. (SS R76).

Q.

Is mere publication of the notice enough to
confer jurisdiction on the court?

A.

It depends. Publication is sufficient and personal notice
is not necessary when the addresses of the heirs,
legatees, devisees, and the executor are not known or
the address given in the petition is wrong. Where such
addresses are known, personal and individual notice to
them is mandatory and jurisdictional. (De Aranz v.
Galing, 161 SCRA 628 [1988]).5

Proof for the allowance of a will
Q.

Where the will in uncontested, what is the
required proof?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL. If no person appears to contest the
allowance of the will, the court may grant allowance
51n

Leriou v. Longa, 8 October 2018, it was stated that personal notice
under 84 R76 is not jurisdictional but a matter of personal convenience since
publication under 83 R76 already vests the court with jurisdiction over all
interested persons. The statement should be considered as obiter or pro hac vice
since the heirs in Leriou were non-residents and thus not entitled to the personal
notice or notice by mail under 84 R76.

39

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the testimony of one of the subscribing witnesses
only, if such witness testify that the will was executed
as is required by law. (S5 R76).
If the subscribing witness does not reside in
the province, the court may authorize the taking of
his deposition and that a photocopy be presented
to the deponent on examination. (S? R76).
If the subscribing witnesses are dead, insane,
or do not reside in the Philippines, the court may
admit the testimony of other witnesses to prove the
sanity of the testator and the due execution of the
will. As evidence of the execution of the will, it may
admit proof of the testator's handwriting and of the
subscribing witnesses or any of them. (SB R76).
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL. Testimony of one witness
who knows the handwriting and signature of the
testator and who explicitly declares that the will and
the signature are in the testator's handwriting. In the
absence of such and if the court deems it necessary,
expert testimony may be resorted to. (S5 R76).
Where the testator himself petitions for the
probate of his holographic will, the fact that he affirms
that the holographic will and the signature are in his
own handwriting shall be sufficient evidence of the
genuineness and due execution thereof. (S12 R76).
Q.

Where the will is contested,what is the required
proof?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL. All the subscribing witnesses and
the notary public if present in the Philippines and
not insane must be produced and examined and
the death, absence, or incapacity of any of them
must be satisfactorily shown to the court.

40

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

If all or some of such witnesses are present in
the Philippines but outside the province where the
will has been filed, their deposition must be taken.
If any or all of them testify against the due
execution of the will, or do not remember having
attestedto it, or are otherwiseof doubtfulcredibility,the
will may neverthelessbe allowedif the court is satisfied
from the testimonyof other witnessesand from all the
evidence presented that the will was executed and
attestedin the mannerrequiredby law. (811 R76).
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL. The will shall be
allowed if at least 3 witnesses who know the
handwriting of the testator explicitly declare that the
will and the signature are in the testator's
handwriting. In the absence of any competent
witness, and if the court deem it necessary, expert
testimony may be resorted to. (811 R76).
Where the testator himself petitions for the
probate of his holographic will, the fact that he
affirms that the holographic will and the signature
thereon are in his own handwriting shall be
sufficient evidence of the genuiness and the due
execution thereof. The burden of disproving the
genuineness and due execution shall be on the
contestant. The testator may, in his turn, present
such additional proof as may be necessary to rebut
the contestant's evidence. (812 R76).
Q.

The oppositor was against the allowance of the
holographic will on the ground that the testatrix's
signature to the will was procured by undue
influence and that the testatrix did not seriously
intend the instrument to be her last will. The
proponent presented only one witness who knew

41

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the testarix's handwritingand signatureand who
explicitly declaredthat the will and the signature
are in the testarix's handwriting. Is this sufficient
evidencefor the allowanceof the will?
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court has held that to contest a
will means to challenge the authenticity thereof.
Here since the challenge was based on undue
influence and lack of testamentary intent but did not
otherwise attack the will's authenticity, the testimony
of one competent witness was sufficient. (See
Azaola v. Singson, 109 Phil. 102).

Q.

In the probate of a holographic will, the
oppositors alleged that the holographic will was
a forgery. The proponent presented two
witnesses who knew the testatrix's handwriting
and signature and who explicitly declared that
the will and the signature are in the testarix's
handwriting. Is this sufficient evidence for the
allowance of the will?

A.

No. Since the will was contested (it being alleged that
the testatrix's signature was a forgery), the
presentation of 3 competent witnesses is mandatory.
The presentation of only two competent witnesses is
not enough; the proponent should have resorted to
expert testimony. (Godoy v. Calugay, 312 SCRA 333).

Q.

Are persons convicted of falsification of a
document,perjury,or false testimonydisqualified
from being witnesses in court?

A.

No. The disqualification under Article 821 refers to
disqualification merely as an attesting and subscribing
witness to the will under Article 805 of the Civil Code
and not to disqualification as a witness in court.
Hence such persons can still testify in the probate of
42

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

a will although obviously not as attesting and
subscribing witnesses.
Proof in case of lost or destroyed will
Q.

May a lost or destroyedwill be proved?

A.

Yes. (86 R76).

Q.

What is the proof of a lost or destroyed will?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL.
Foundational evidence on:
1) The execution and validity of the will, and
2) The existence of the will at the time of the
testator's death, or that the same was fraudulently
or accidentally destroyed during the testator's
lifetime without his knowledge.
Secondary evidence.
At least two credible witnesses by which the
provisions of the will are clearly and distinctly proved.
(86 R76). A photocopy of the will is admissible.
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL.
Foundational evidence: Same as for notarial
will (by analogy from 86 R76).
Secondary evidence: The Supreme Court has
held that a photocopy is admissible to prove a lost or
destroyed holographic will. Testimonial evidence is
however not admissible as secondary evidence
because of the great risk of fraud or mistake. (Gan v.
Yap, 104 Phil 509; Rode/as v. Aranza, 119 SCRA 16).

43

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Disal/owance of will
Q. What are the grounds for the disallowance of a will?

A.

The will shall be disallowed in any of the following
cases: (EDIFUMI)
1) If not .xecuted and attested as required by law;
2) If the testator was insane or otherwise mentally
incapable to make a will at the time of its execution;
3) If it was executed under guress, or the influence
of fear, or threats;
4) If it was procured by gndue and improper pressure
and influence, on the part of the beneficiary, or of
some other person for his benefit;
5) If the signature of the testator was procured by
fraud; or
6) If the testator acted by mistake or did not intend
that the instrument he signed should be his will
at the time of affixing his signature thereto.
(S9 R76; Article 839, Civil Code).
Note: The presence of any of the above
circumstances renders the will void not merely
voidable. There is no such thing as a voidable
will. (RUBEN F. BALANE, JOTTINGS AND
JURISPRUDENCE IN CIVIL LAW 200 [2002 rev. ed]).

Q.

During probate proper stage, may the probate
court pass upon the question of whether a
testamentarydisposition is void?

A.

No. The rule is that during the probate proper stage,
i.e., the stage where the court will rule on whether
to allow or disallow the will, the court can pass only

44

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

upon the extrinsic validity of the will, that is, whether
the will complied with the formalities prescribed by
law and whether the testator had testamentary
capacity. The intrinsic validity of the will will be
passed upon by the probate court only during the
stage for the determination of the heirs and the
distribution of the estate. (Pastor v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 56340, 24 June 1983).
Q.

Maria, to spite her husband Jorge, whom she
suspected was having an affair with another
woman, executed a will, unknown to him,
bequeathing all the properties she inherited
from her parents to her sister Miguela. Upon her
death, the will was presented for probate. Jorge
opposed probate of the will on the ground that
the will was executed by his wife without his
knowledge, much less consent, and that it
deprived him of his legitime. After all, he had
given her no cause for disinheritance, added
Jorge in his opposition. How will you rule on
Jorge's opposition to the probate of Maria's
will, if you were the judge? (93 Bar Civil Law Q7)

A.

If I were the judge, I will deny Jorge's opposition to
the probate of Maria's will.
The Supreme Court has held that during the
probate of a will, the probate court can pass only
upon the extrinsic validity of the will.
Here the ground that the will deprived Jorge of
his legitime relates to the will's intrinsic validity
which the probate court will pass upon only during
the determination of the heirs and the distribution
stage but not during the probate of the will. Hence
Jorge's opposition should be denied.
45

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The ground that the will was executed without
the knowledge or consent of Jorge is not even a
ground to attack the validity of the will, whether
extrinsic or intrinsic, since a will is not a contract but
a unilateral act of the testator.
Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that the
probate court during the probate proper stage may
pass only upon the extrinsic validity of the will?

A.
1) Where the defect of the will is apparent on its
face and the probate of the will would become a
useless ceremony if it is intrinsically invalid. An
example would be where the testator instituted
the petitioner as universal heir and completely
preterited her surviving heirs. (Nuguid v. Nuguid,
17 SCRA 449).
2) If the will does not contain legacies or devises.
The reason is that the annulment of the institution
of heirs would result in the total abrogation of the
will leading to instestacy. Therefore, the conduct
of separate proceedings to determine the intrinsic
validity of its testamentary provisions would be
superfluous. (Morales v. Olondriz, 783 SCRA 151
[2016), Brion, J.).
3) Where the parties agree that the intrinsic validity
be first determined. (Nepomuceno v. Court of
Appeals, 139 SCRA 206).
Q.

H died leaving a last will and testament wherein
it is stated that he was legally married to W by
whom he had two legitimate children A and B. H
devised to his said forced heirs the entire estate
except the free portion which he gave to X who

46

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

was living with him at the time of his death. In
said will H explainedthat he had been estranged
from his wife W for more than 20 years and he
has been living with X as man and wife since his
separation from his legitimate family. In the
probate proceedings, X asked for the issuance
of letters testamentary in accordance with the
will wherein she is named as sole executrix.
This was opposed by W and A and B. Assume
that the will had been executed in accordance
with the formalitiesrequired by law.
a) Is the will intrinsically
valid?
b) May the probate court disallow the will?
(90 Bar Civil Law Q9ed).
A.

a) No, the will is not intrinsically valid.
Under Article 1028 of the Civil Code in relation to
Article 739 of the Civil Code, testamentary dispositions
between persons who were guilty of adultery or
concubinage at the time of such disposition are void.
Here the testamentary disposition was made
between H and X who were guilty of adultery and/or
concubinage. Considering that the will has only one
testamentary disposition, since legitimes are already
provided for by law, the will is entirely void.
b) The court may disallow the will.
The general rule is that a probate court during
the probate proper stage cannot pass upon the
intrinsic validity of the will. However where the defect
of the will is apparent on its face, the court may pass
upon its intrinsic validity since the probate of the will
would become a useless ceremony.
47

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Here the defect of the will is apparent on its
face since the will itself stated that the devisee was
a paramour of the testator. Hence the court may
disallow the will. (Nepomuceno v. Court of Appeals,
139 SCRA 206 [1985]).
Q.

Iris Morales filed a petition with the RTC alleging
that the decedent left a will dated 23 July 1991.
Morales prayed for the probate of the will and for
her appointment as special administratrix.
The pertinent portion of the will reads as
follows:
Upon my death, IRIS MORALES OLONDRIZ
shall be the executor hereof and administrator
of my estate until its distribution in accordance
herewith.
My entire estate shall be divided into six
parts to be distributed equally among and
between (1) IRIS MORALES OLONDRIZ, my
children (2) ALFONSO JUAN OLONDRIZ, JR., (3)
ALEJANDRO OLONDRIZ, (4) !SABEL OLONDRIZ,
(5) ANGELO OLONDRIZ, and their mother (6)
MARIA ORTEGAS OLONDRIZ, SR.
Notably, the will omitted Francisco Javier
Olondriz, an illegitimate son of the decedent.
During the hearing for the allowance of the will,
the court disallowed the will on the ground of
preterition. Was it proper for the court to pass
upon the issue of preterition during the probate
proper stage?

A.

Yes, while the general rule is that in probate
proceedings, the scope of the court's inquiry is limited
to questions on the extrinsic validity of the will, this
48

J9JC9B0M

RULE 76
Allowance Or Disallowance Of Will

rule is not inflexible and absolute. It is not beyond the
probate court's jurisdiction to pass upon the intrinsic
validity of the will when so warranted by exceptional
circumstances, like when practical considerations
demand that the intrinsic validity of the will be passed
upon even before it is probated for to do otherwise
may render the conduct of probate proceedings a
useless ceremony.
Here, the probate court can resolve the issue
of preterition considering that the will does not
contain specific legacies or devises since the effect
of preterition is the annulment of the institution of
heirs. The annulment effectively caused the total
abrogation of the will, resulting in total intestacy of
the inheritance. The decedent's will, no matter how
valid it may appear extrinsically, is null and void.
Therefore, the conduct of separate proceedings to
determine the intrinsic validity of its testamentary
provisions would be superfluous. (Morales v.
Olondriz, 783 SCRA 151 [2016], Brion, J.)
Q.

Czarina died single. She left all her properties
by will to her friend Duqueza. In the will, Czarina
stated that she did not recognize Marco as an
adopted son because of his disrespectful
conduct towards her.
Duqueza soon instituted an action for
probate of Czarina's will. Marco, on the other
hand, instituted intestate proceedings. Both
actions were consolidated before the RTC of
Pasig. On motion of Marco, Duqueza's petition
was ordered dismissed on the ground that the
will is void for depriving him of his legitime.
Argue for Duqueza. (10 Bar Q14).

49

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

I would argue that the will is not void for there was
no preterition. Preterition applies only to inadvertent
omission in the will. Here there was no inadvertent
omission because Czarina mentioned Marco in the
will and made an ineffective disinheritance. Hence
the will was valid and should be given effect to the
extent that it does not impair Marco's legitime.
I would also argue that during the probate
proper stage, the probate court can pass only upon
the extrinsic, not the intrinsic, validity of the will.
When the court declared the will void for depriving
Marco of his legitime, it was passing upon the
intrinsic validity of the will.

Q.

What happens to the proceedings if the will is
disallowed?

A.

If an opposition with simultaneous petition for letters
of administration was filed, the court can continue
the proceedings as an intestate case. If no such
petition was filed, the court shall discontinue or
suspend the proceedings. A petition for letters of
administration may then be filed in the same or in a
separate case. 6

6Applying
by analogy the procedure recommended in Uriarte v. CF/ of
Negros Occidental, 29 May 1970, where a will was discovered during the
pendency of the intestate proceedings. See also S1 R79.

50

J9JC9B0M

RULE 77. ALLOWANCE OF WILL PROVED
OUTSIDE OF THE PHILIPPINES AND
ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATE THEREUNDER
Q.

May a will proved and allowed in a foreign
country be allowed in our courts?

A.

Yes. A will proved and allowed in a foreign country,
according to the laws of such country, may be
allowed, filed, and recorded by the proper Regional
Trial Court/MTG in the Philippines. (S1 R77).

Q.

May a will executed by a foreigner abroad be
probated in the Philippines although it has not
been previously probated and allowed in the
countrywhere it was executed?

A.

Yes. Our laws do not prohibit the probate of wills
executed by foreigners abroad although the same
have not as yet been probated and allowed in the
countries of their execution. A foreign will can be
given legal effect in our jurisdiction. Article 816 of
the Civil Code states that the will of an alien who is
abroad produces effect in the Philippines if made in
accordance with the formalities prescribed by the
law of the place where he resides, or according to
the formalities observed in his country. While there
is a proceeding for reprobate provided for in R77, it
does not mean that a will not probated abroad
cannot be probated in the Philippines. R77 should
be read in conjunction with Article 816. (Pa/aganas
v. Palaganas, 640 SCRA 538 [2011], Abad, J.).

51

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over a petition for
reprobate?

A.

Either the RTC or the MTC, depending upon the
gross value of the estate. If such value exceeds
P300,000 (outside Metro Manila) or P400,000
(within Metro Manila), it would be the RTC which
would have jurisdiction; otherwise it would be the
MTC. (Sec. 19[4], B.P. Big. 129).

Q.

If a will is proved and allowed in a foreign
country, would that be sufficient for the
distribution of the testator's property located in
the Philippines?

A.

No. The will must be reprobated in the Philippines in
accordance with R77. This is because the powers
and processes of a probate court cannot ex proprio
vigore have any effect beyond the limits of the state
in which it was granted. (Collector of Internal
Revenue v. Fischer, 1 SCRA 93).

Q.

Outline in brief the procedure for the reprobate
of a will proved abroad.

A.
1) The executor or other interested person shall file
with the court a duly authenticated copy of the
will and the order or decree of allowance.
2) The court shall fix a time and place for the hearing
and cause notice thereof to be given as in the
case of an original will presented for allowance.
3) At the proceedings for reprobate, the proponent
must prove:
a) That the testator was domiciled in the foreign
country,

52

J9JC9B0M

RULE 77
Allowance Of Will Proved Outside Of the Philippines
And Administration Of Estate Thereunder

b) That the will was admitted to probate in such
country,
c) That the foreign court was, under the laws of
said foreign country, a probate court with
jurisdiction over the proceedings,
d) The law on probate procedure in said foreign
country and proof of compliance therewith, and
e)

The legal requirement is said foreign
country for the valid execution of the will. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 32 [61h rev. ed., 2nd printing]).

4) If it appears at the hearing that the will should
be allowed in the Philippines, a certificate of its
allowance shall be filed and recorded by the
clerk, and the will shall have the same effect as
if originally proved and allowed in such court.
5) The court shall grant letters testamentary, or
letters of administration with the will annexed,
and such letters shall extend to all the testator's
estate in the Philippines. Such estate, after
payment of debts and administration expenses,
shall be disposed of according to the will and the
residue remitted to the domiciliary jurisdiction.

53

J9JC9B0M

RULE 78. LETTERS TESTAMENTARY
AND OF ADMINISTRATION,
WHEN AND TO WHOM ISSUED
Q.

What is the
proceedings?

initiatory pleading

in probate

A.
1) If a person dies testate, the initiatory pleading is a:
a) Petition for allowance of will and for letters
testamentary if there is an executor named in
the will, or
b) Petition for allowance of will and for letters of
administration with the will annexed, in case
there is a will but there is no executor named in
the will or the executor named in the will is
incompetent, refuses the appointment, or fails to
give a bond.
2) If a person dies intestate, the initiatory pleading
is a petition for letters of administration.
Q.

Who is an executor?

A.

An executor is the person named in the will to
administer the decedent's estate and carry out the
provisions thereof.

Q.

Who is an administrator?

A.

An administrator is the person appointed by the court
to administer the estate where the decedent died
intestate, or where the will was void and not allowed
to probate, or where no executor was named in the
will or the executor named therein is incompetent,
refuses the trust, or fails to give a .!2ond. (BIRNI)

54

J9JC9B0M

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary And Of Administration,
When And To Whom Issued

Q.

Who are incompetent to serve as executors or
administrators?

A.

The following are incompetent
executors or administrators (MNC):

to

serve

as

1) Minor.
2) Non-resident.
3) In the .Qourt's opinion unfit to execute the duties of
the trust by reason of: grunkenness, improvidence,
want of understanding or integrity, or by reason
of .Qonviction of an offense involving moral
turpitude. (CWID)
Q.

May a person convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude be competent to serve as
executor or administrator?

A.

Yes, if in the court's opinion he or she is fit to
execute the duties of the trust.

Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of the
estate of Ferdinand E. Marcos before the RTC,
the government opposed the issuance of letters
testamentary to Bongbong Marcos on the
ground that he had been convicted of failure to
file income tax return. The government argued
that such conviction rendered Bongbong
incompetentto serve as executor.
a) Is the government's contention correct?
b) Assuming that the probate court ordered the
issuanceof letters testamentaryto Bongbong
Marcos, what would be the remedy of the
government?
55

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
a) No. Under Sec. 1 (c) of Rule 78, no person is
competent to serve as executor or administrator
who is in the court's opinion unfit to execute the
duties of the trust by reason of conviction of an
offense involving moral turpitude. The offense of
failure to file income tax return however is not
one involving moral turpitude since it is a ma/um
prohibitum in which criminal intent is immaterial.
(Republic v. Marcos, 4 August 2009)
b) The remedy of the government is to appeal the order
under Section 1 (a) of Rule 109. Hence the petition
for review on certiorari filed with the SC was the
wrong mode and was properly dismissed. (Id.).
Q.

Andy is the executor of the estate of Ziggy. Andy
dies. In his will he named Bert as his executor.
May Bert administer the estate of Ziggy?

A.

No. The executor of an executor shall not, as such,
administer the estate of the first testator. (82 R78).
Upon the death of Andy, the probate court with
jurisdiction over Ziggy's estate shall appoint an
administrator. (82 R82).

Q.

When shall the court issue letters testamentary
to the person named as executor in the will?

A.

When the will has been proved and allowed, the court
shall issue letters testamentary to the person named
as executor therein, if he is competent, accepts the
trust, and gives bond as required under R81. (CAB)

Q.

When may the probate court issue letters of
administration?

56

J9JC9B0M

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary And Of Administration,
When And To Whom Issued

A.

The probate court may issue letters of administration:
(BIRNI)
1) If no executor is named in the will.
2) The executor is incompetent, refuses the trust,
or fails to give bond.

3) A person dies intestate. (86 R78)
Note that there should first be a petition for
letters of administration before the court may issue
the letters.
Q.

To whom shall letters of administration be granted?

A.

The rules lay down the following order of preference:
(SNB RPC)
1) Surviving spouse.
2) Next of kin.7
3) Surviving spouse and next of kin.
4) Person who the surviving spouse or next of kin
requests to have appointed.
5) Principal creditor/s if the above neglect for 30
days after the person's death to apply for
administration or to request that administration
be granted to some other person.
6) Person as the court may select, if no principal
creditor competent and willing to serve. (86 R78).

7The
text of 86 R78 seems to show that the surviving spouse and the next
of kin are on the same level in the order of preference. Jurisprudence however
indicates that the surviving spouse is first in the order of preference over the next
of kin. The reason is the greater interest of the surviving spouse since he or she
is not only entitled to the estate of the deceased spouse but also to his or her
one-half share in the conjugal or absolute community of property. (Gabriel v.
Yuzon, 7 August 1992, Regalado, J).

57

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the probate court disregard the order of
preference in 56 R78?

A.

Yes, the probate court may for valid cause disregard
such order of preference. For instance if in the
court's opinion the surviving spouse is incompetent
by reason of want of understanding or integrity, the
court may appoint a next of kin as the administrator.

Q.

Should the executor or administrator file the
letters testamentary or the letters of administration
with the registerof deeds?

A.

Yes. Before the executor or administrator of the
estate of the deceased owner of registered land
may deal with the same, he shall file with the office
of the Register of Deeds a certified copy of his
letters of administration or if there is a will, a
certified copy thereof and the order allowing the
same, together with the letters testamentary or of
administration with the will annexed, as the case
may be, and shall produce the duplicate certificate
of title. (887 Property Registration Decree).

Q.

Emilio was not appointed as the administrator
of his grandmother'sestate, although he claims
rights as an heir. What are his remedies in order
to protect his interests in the estate?

A.

The remedies available to an "interested person" or
"any person interested in the estate" are the following:
1) Section 6 of Rule 87, which allows an
individual interested in the estate of the deceased
"to complain to the court of the concealment,
embezzlement, or conveyance of any asset of the
decedent, or of evidence of the decedent's title or
interest therein;"

58

J9JC9B0M

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary And Of Administration,
When And To Whom Issued

2) Section 10 of Rule 85, which requires notice
of the time and place of the examination and
allowance of the administrator'saccount "to persons
interested;"
3) Section ?(b) of Rule 89, which requires the
court to give notice "to the persons interested" before
it may hear and grant a petition seeking the
disposition or encumbrance of the properties of the
estate; and
4) Section 1, Rule 90, which allows "any
person interested in the estate" to petition for an
order for the distribution of the residue of the estate
of the decedent, after all obligations are either
satisfied or provided for.
5) Section 2 of Rule 82 which provides that
the probate court may remove or accept the
resignation of an executor/administratoron ground
of incapacity or unsuitability to discharge the trust.
( Suntay v. Cojuangco-Suntay, 10 October 2012).

59

J9JC9B0M

RULE 79. PETITION AND CONTEST FOR
LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION
Q.

Who may oppose the issuance of letters
testamentary and how does one oppose? May
the oppositor at the same time file a petition for
letters of administrationwith the will annexed?

A.

Any person interested in the will may state in writing
the grounds why letters testamentary should not
issue to the persons named therein as executors,
or any of them. A petition may at the same time be
filed for letters of administration with the will
annexed (simultaneous petition for administration).

Q.

Who may file a petition for letters of
administration and what are the contents thereof?

A.

A petition for letters of administration must be filed
by an interested person and must show so far as
known to the petitioner:
1) The jurisdictional facts;
2) The names, ages, and residences of the heirs,
and the names and residences of the creditors;
3) The probable value and character
property of the estate; and

of the

4) The name of the person for whom letters of
administration are prayed. (S2 R79).
Q.

What is the meaning of an "interestedperson"?

A.

An interested person is one who stands to benefit
from the distribution of the estate as in the case of
an heir or one who has a claim against the estate,
as in the case of a creditor of the deceased. The

60

J9JC9B0M

RULE 79
Petition And Contest For
Letters Of Administration

interest must be material and direct and not merely
indirect or contingent. (San Luis v. San Luis, G.R.
No. 133743, 6 February 2007). Thus a claimant
whose right depends the disallowance of the
second will and the incapacity of the legatees in the
first will to inherit is not an interested party since his
interest depends upon a contingency. (Espinosa v.
Barrios, 70 Phil. 311 ).
Q.

Domenico and Gen lived without the benefit of
marriage for twenty years, during which time they
purchased properties together. After Domenico
died without a will, Gen filed a petition for letters
of administration. Domenico's siblings opposed
the same on the ground that Gen has no legal
personality. Decide. (08 Bar Q18).

A.

Opposition denied.
The Supreme Court has held that a person
who has cohabited with another is a co-owner of
the properties acquired through their joint efforts
during the cohabitation pursuant to Articles 147 and
148 of the Family Code and that such co-ownership
would qualify her as an interested person within the
purview of S2 R79. (San Luis v. San Luis, G.R. No.
133743, 6 February 2007).
(Note: The ruling in San Luis seems arguable.
The interest of the person who has cohabited with
another is not on the estate of the deceased party
but on her share of the co-ownership. She does not
stand to benefit from the estate of the deceased
party. She would have legal personality to bring an
action for partition but not for settlement of estate.)

61

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
. REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Will a defect in the petition render void the
issuance of letters of administration?

A.

No.

Q.

When a petition for letters of administration is
filed in the probate court, what shall the court do?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for hearing the
petition, and shall cause notice thereof to be given
to the known heirs and creditors fo the decedent,
and to any other persons believed to have an
interest in the estate, in the manner proved for in
83 (publicationJ and 4 (mail or personal service) of
R76. (83 R79).

Q.

Who and how may one oppose the petition for
administration?

A.

Any interested person may, by filing a written
opposition, contest the petition on the ground of the
incompetency of the person for whom letters are
prayed therein, or on the ground of the contestant's
own right to the administration, and may pray that
letters issue to himself, or to any competent person
or persons named in the opposition. (84 R79).

(82 R79).

Only an heir or creditor can oppose the
issuance of letters of administration as they are the
only ones who would be benefited by the estate.
(Chua v. Court of Appeals, 287 8CRA 33). Hence
an heir who has assigned his hereditary rights
before settlement proceedings were commenced, is
no longer an interested person qualified to file or
oppose a petition for letters of administration.

8Compare
with 84 R76 where notice is required to be given to the known heirs,
legatees, devisees, and executor (if not the petitioner), but not to the creditors.

62

J9JC9B0M

RULE 79
Petition And Contest For
Letters Of Administration

Q.

When may letters of administration be granted
to any qualified applicant?

A.

Letters of administration may be granted to any
applicant, though it appears that there are other
competent persons having better right to the
administration, if such persons fail to appear when
notified and claim the issuance of letters to
themselves. (S6 R79).

Q.

What should the probate court do if in the
course of the intestate proceedings, a will is
discovered?

A.

The probate court should discontinue or suspend
proceedings and direct the filing of a petition for
allowance of the will. Such petition may be filed in
the same or in a different case. The reason for this
rule is that testate proceedings take precedence
over intestate proceedings. Should the will be
allowed, the probate proceedings shall be
terminated and any letters of administration issued
shall be revoked. (Uriarte v. CF/ of Negros
Occidental, 29 May 1970).

63

J9JC9B0M

RULE 80. SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR
Q.

What are the ground for the appointment of a
special administrator?

A.

The court may appoint a special administrator to
take possession and charge of the estate:
a) When there is a delay in granting letters
testamentary or of administration by any cause
including an appeal from the allowance or
disallowance of a will. (S1 R80).
b) If the executor or administrator has a claim
against the estate he represents, the court shall
appoint a special administrator for the adjustment
of the claim. (S8 R86).

Q.

Pending appeal from the appointment of a
regular administrator, may the court appoint a
special administrator?

A.

No, because the administrator-appointee should be
the administrator
pending appeal from his
appointment. (Relucio v. San Jose, 81 Phil. 365).

Q.

Where there is a dispute or disagreement as to who
should be appointed regular administrator, may the
probate court appoint a special administrator?

A.

Yes if such disagreement results in the undue delay
in the issuance of letters of administration.
(Ocampo v. Ocampo, 623 SCRA 559 [2010]).

Q.

What are the powers and duties of a special
administrator?

A.

The special administrator shall take possession and
charge of the estate and preserve the same for the
64

J9JC9B0M

RULE 80
Special Administrator

executor or administrator afterwards appointed.
For this purpose he may commence and maintain
suits. (S2 R80).
Q.

What are the restrictions on the powers and
duties of the special administrator?

A.

He may sell only such perishable and other property
as the court orders sold. He shall not be liable to
pay any debts of the deceased unless so ordered
by the court. (S2 R80).

Q.

When do the powers of the special administrator
cease?

A.

The powers of the special administrator shall cease
when letters testamentary or of administration are
granted on the estate. He shall forthwith deliver to
the executor or administrator the goods and the
estate of the deceased in his hands. (S3 R80).

Q.

May the executor or administrator prosecute to
final judgment suits which had been commenced
by the special administrator?

A.

Yes. (S3 R80).

Q.

May the court appoint a special administrator
prior to the publication of the notice of hearing
on the petition for settlement of the estate?

A.

No, because prior to such publicationthe court has
not yet acquiredjurisdictionover personsinterestedin
the estate. (De Guzman v. Angeles, 162 SCRA 347).

Q.

Do the statutory preferences in the appointment
of a regularadministratorapply to the appointment
of a special administrator?
65

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. The court should not however exercise its
discretion whimsically.

Q.

When the trial court appointed a special
administrator, one of the heirs elevatedthe case
to the Court of Appeals alleging that the RTC
erred in not following the order of preference
prescribed by the Rules and that the RTC
should have designated one of the heirs and
not a third party as administrator. The CA held
that the appointmentof special administrator is
interlocutory and not appealablenor subject to
certiorari. What is the nature of an order
appointing a special administrator? May such
order be appealed?

A.

The appointment of a special administrator is
interlocutory and discretionary on the part of the
RTC and non-appealable. (S1 [e] R109). However,
it can be subject to certiorari if it can be shown that
the appointment was made with grave abuse of
discretion. (Jamero vs. Melicor, 26 May 2005)

66

.-

J9JC9B0M

RULE 81. BONDS OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

Is the executor or administrator required to give
a bond before he enters upon the execution of
his trust and before letters testamentary or of
administrationshall issue?

A.

Yes. The bond shall be in such sum as the court
directs. (S1 R81 ).

Q.

What are the conditions of the bond?

A.

The bond is conditioned as follows: (APIA)
1) INVENTORY. The executor/administrator
shall submit to the court within 3 months after his
receipt of letters testamentary or of administration9
an inventory and appraisal of all the estate of the
deceased which shall come to his possession or
knowledge.
2) ADMINISTRATION.
The executor/administrator
shall administer the estate and from the proceeds
to pay and discharge all debts, legacies, and
charges on the same, or such dividends thereon as
shall be decreed by the court.
3) ACCOUNTING. The executor/administrator
shall render a true and just account of his
administration to the court within 1 year from receipt
of letters testamentary or of administration,10 and at
any other time when required by the court.

9Although
81 R83 states "(w]ithin three months after his appointment," this
should be read as "within three months from the time of receiving letters testamentary
or of administration," adopting the more precise phraseologyin 88 R85.
1088
R85.

67

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

4) PERFORMANCE OF COURT ORDERS.
The executor/administrator shall perform all court
orders. (81 R81 ).
Q.

If the testator in his will directs that the executor
serve without bond or with only his individual
bond, is the executor still required to give bond?

A.

Yes. The executor may be allowed by the court to
give bond in such sum and with such surety as the
court approves conditioned only to pay the debts of
the testator. The court may however require the
executor to post a further bond in case of a change
of circumstances, or for other sufficient cause, with
the conditions provided for in 81 R81. (82 R82).

Q.

Is the 3-month period for the executor/administrator
to file the inventory mandatory or jurisdictional?

A.

No. The 3-month period is not mandatory. After the
filing of the petition for letters of administration and
the publication of the notice of hearing, the probate
court acquires jurisdiction over the estate and retains
that jurisdiction until the proceeding is closed. The
fact that the inventory was filed after the 3-month
period would not deprive or oust the probate court of
jurisdiction to approve it. The executor's/administrator's
unexplained delay in filing the inventory may be a
ground for his removal. ( Cuizon v. Ramolete, 129
SCRA495).

Q.

Is the probate court's determination of the
properties included and excluded from the
inventoryfinal?

A.

No. While the probate court has jurisdiction to
determine whether or not the properties included in
the inventory or excluded therefrom belong prima

68

J9JC9B0M

RULE 81
Bonds Of Executors And Administrators

facie to the deceased, such a determination is not
final and without prejudice to the right of the
interested party to raise in a proper action the
question of ownership. (Reyes v. Mosqueda, 187
SCRA 661 ). The making of the inventory is
therefore of a preliminary and provisional nature
and is not absolutely decisive of the rights of all
persons in interest.
Q.

A and B are brothers.Their late father, during his
lifetime, donated his only real estate property to
8. Thereafter,B sold the propertyto C who had it
titled. C died intestate and was survived by his
son, D. A, claiming that his legitime had been
impaired,filed a case for annulment of donation
and sale, cancellation of title and recovery of
possession of the property before Branch 85 of
the Regional Trial Court. D filed a motion to
dismiss the complaint on the ground that there is
a pending intestate estate proceeding before
Branch 87 involving the estate of C, his father,
which included the subject real property. A
opposed the motion arguing that Branch 85 has
jurisdiction since ownership of the land is
involved and the said branch has jurisdiction to
resolve the question of ownership. As judge of
Branch85, resolvethe motion to dismiss.

A.

I would deny the motion to dismiss. The Supreme
Court has held that a probate court has no jurisdiction
over the question of title to properties. Such question
should be resolved in a separate action. (Pizarro v.
Court of Appeals, L-31979, 6 August 1980).

69

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the court waive the executor's/administrator's
duty to render an accounting?

A.

No. The duty of an administrator to render an
accounting is not a mere incident of an administration
proceeding which can be waived or disregarded
when the same is terminated. It is a duty that has to
be performed and duly acted upon by the court before
the administration is finally closed and terminated.
(Jason v. Jason, 2 SCRA 82).

Q.

Are the sureties on the bond entitled to notice
of the settlement of the account of an
executor/administrator?

A.

No, since the surety is considered privy to the
proceedings against his principal. The surety may
however be allowed to intervene in such settlement.
Under S 11 R85 upon the settlement of the account of
an executor/administrator, a person liable as surety
on such account may, upon application, be admitted
as party to such accounting.

Q.

In exercising acts of administration, does the
executor/admin
istrator need prior leave of court?

A.

No. The administrator has the power to administer
the estate for purposes of liquidation and distribution;
he may therefore exercise all acts of administration
without special court authority and this includes
leasing the property since leasing is an act of
administration. (San Diego v. Nombre, 11 SCRA 165
[1964); Mananquil v. Villegas, 189 SCRA 335).

Q.

May an administrator appoint himself as agent
to sell estate property?

A.

No. It would be improper for the administrator to
appoint himself as agent to sell estate property even if

70

J9JC9B0M

RULE 81
Bonds Of Executors And Administrators

he proves benefit to be derived by the estate. A
contrary rule would open the door to fraud and
mismanagement.(Jaroda v. Cusi, 28 SCRA 108).
Q.

May an executor/administrator without prior court
approval borrowmoney in behalf of the estate?

A.

No. An administrator has no authority without prior
court approval to borrow money in behalf of the
estate. He is not authorized to contract debts and
establish obligations to the injury and prejudice of
the heirs, and in case the administrator has so
acted, he alone will be responsible with his own
property for the debts contracted by him. (Fabie v.
Yulo, 24 Phil. 240).

Q.

What is the nature of the bond posted by the
executor or administrator?

A.

It is in effect a performance or fidelity bond,
intended to indemnify the creditors and heirs and to
assure the faithful performance of the executor's or
administrator's trust.

Q.

An executor fraudulently misappropriated the
estate of the deceased. How may an heir or creditor
enforce the surety's liability under the bond?

A.

Liability under the bond may be enforced either in
an ordinary civil action or in the same
administration proceedings.

Q.

In an action or motion to enforce liability under
the bond, may the surety raise the defense that
the bond was not renewed or that the premiums
thereon have not been paid?

A.

No. The surety's liability under the bond is continuing
for as long as the executoror administrator has duties
71

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

to perform as such. (Luzon Surety Co. v. Quebral,
127 SCRA 295). Furthermore under Section 177 of
the Insurance Code, the suretyship shall be binding
notwithstanding nonpayment of the premium where
the obligee has accepted the bond.
Q.

In order to enforce liability under the bond, may
the probate court issue writs of execution?

A.

Yes, the probate court may issue writs of execution on
the bond and against the sureties as a necessary
incident of its jurisdiction over the estate proceedings.
(Cosme de Mendoza v. Pacheco, 64 Phil. 134).

Q.

Is a special administrator required to post a bond?

A.

Yes, before entering upon the duties of his trust, the
special administrator shall give a bond, in such sum
as the court directs, conditioned that: (AID)
1) INVENTORY. He will make and return a true
inventory of the estate of the deceased which
come to his possession or knowledge.
2) ACCOUNT. He will truly account for estate
or property received by him when required by
the court.
3) DELIVERY. He will deliver the estate or property
received by him to the person appointed executor
or administrator, or to such other person as may
be authorized to receive them. (84 R81 ).

72

J9JC9B0M

RULE 82. REVOCATION OF
ADMINISTRATION, DEATH, RESIGNATION,
AND REMOVAL OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

What is the effect on a pending intestate
proceeding if subsequently a will is discovered
and allowed?

A.

If after letters of administration have been granted
on the estate of a decedent as if he had died
intestate, his will is proved and allowed by the
court, the letters of administration shall be revoked
and all powers thereunder cease, and the
administrator shall forthwith surrender the letters to
the court, and render his account within such time
as the court directs. Proceedings for the issuance
of letters testamentary or of administration under
the will shall then commence. (S1 R82).
Note that it is only when the newly discovered
will has been admitted to probate that the letters of
administrationshall be revokedby the probatecourt.

Q.

When may the probate court remove an
executor/administrator?

A.

The court may remove an executor or administrator
if he (PARIU):
a) Neglects to g_erform an order or judgment of the
court;
b) Absconds;
c) Neglects to render his account and settle the
estate;

73

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

d) Becomes insane;
e) Becomes ynsuitable to discharge the trust.
The court may in its discretion permit the
executor/administrator to resign. (S2 R82).
Q.

May a contingent creditor have the personality to
seek the removal of an executor or administrator?

A.

Yes. While S2 R82 is silent as to who may seek the
executor or administrator's removal, it cannot be
doubted that a creditor, even a contingent one,
would have such personality. After all the interest
of the creditor in the estate relates to the
preservation of sufficient assets to answer for the
debt, and the general competence or good faith of
the executor or administrator is necessary to fulfill
such promise. (Hilado v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
164108, 8 May 2009).

Q.

Is the subsequent discovery that the duly
appointed administrator was indebted to the
decedent a ground for his removal?

A.

No. The mere fact that the administrator was
indebted to the decedent is not a ground for his
removal, absent any other circumstances indicating
bad faith or lack of integrity on his part. (Dalisay v.
Consolacion, L-44702, 30 July 1979).

Q.

An administratrix was later held to be without the
right to intervene in the settlement of the estate
as an heir. Is that a ground for her removal?

A.

No, since even a stranger can be appointed as an
administrator. (Parreno v. Aranzado, L-27657, 30
August 1982).
74

J9JC9B0M

RULE 82
Revocation Of Administration, Death, Resignation, And
Removal Of Executors And Administrators

Q.

May a co-administrator be removed on the
ground of conflictwith his co-administrator?

A.

No. The court should resolve the conflict to the best
interests of the estate. ( Gonzalez v. Aguinaldo, 190
SCRA 112).

Q.

Is the temporary residence outside the country,
maintained for the benefit of the health of the
administrator'sfamily, a groundfor his removal?

A.

No. (Id.).

Q.

An -executor claimed as his own certain shares
in the deceased's name in a gas company on
the ground that the deceased was merely his
dummy.May the executorbe properlyremoved?

A.

Yes. There is a conflict of interest between that of the
executor and that of the deceased since the executor
becomes unsuitable to discharge the trust.
An
executor is a quasi-trustee who should be indifferent
between the interests of the claimants and the estate,
except to preserve the estate for due administration.
(Borromeo v. Borromeo, 97 Phil. 549).

Q.

What is the effect of the revocationof the letters
testamentary, of the resignation or removal of
the executor or administrator
upon his previous
lawful acts?

A.

The lawful acts of the executor or administrator
before the revocation of his letters testamentary or
of administration or before his resignation or
removal shall remain valid notwithstanding such
revocation, resignation, or removal. (83 R82).

75

J9JC9B0M

RULE 83. INVENTORY AND APPRAISAL;
PROVISION FOR SUPPORT OF FAMILY
Q.

What are excluded from the inventory?

A.

The following are excluded from the inventory and
as such shall not be considered as assets nor
administered as such: (SBC)
1) Clothes of the surviving spouse and the
minor children.
2) Marriage Qed and bedding.
3) Provisions as will necessarily be consumed
in the .Ubsistence of the family of the deceased
under the court's direction.

Q.

During the settlement of the estate, is there an
allowance for the deceased's family?

A.

Yes. The widow and minor or incapacitated children
of the deceased shall receive from the estate,
under the court's direction, such allowance as are
provided by law. (S3 R83). While this provision
mentions only the "widow," and the "minor" children,
it should be deemed to include the widower and the
children even of legal age as the right to support,
especially the right to education, subsists even
beyond the age of majority. (See Article 194, Family
Code; 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 53 [91h rev. ed.]).

76

J9JC9B0M

RULE 83
Inventory And Appraisal;
Provision For Support Of Family

Q.

What is the basis of the allowance under 53
R83? May it be attached or levied on execution?
May it be the object of contracts?

A.

S3 R83 provides for the allowance granted to the
widow and family of the deceased person during
the settlement of the estate. This allowance is
rooted on the right and duty to support under the
Civil Code. The right to support is a purely personal
right essential to the life of the recipient, so that it
cannot be subject to attachment or execution.
Neither can it be renounced or transmitted to a third
person. Being intransmissible, support cannot be
the object of contracts. Nonetheless, it has also
been held that support in arrears is a different thing
altogether. It may be compensated, renounced and
transmitted by onerous or gratuitous title. ( Siguion
Reyna Montecillo Ongsiako v. Chiong/a-Sia, 3
February 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

77

J9JC9B0M

RULE 84. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES
OF EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

Does an executor or administratorhave the right
to the possession and management of the real as
well as the personal estate of the deceased?

A.

Yes, so long as it is necessary for the payment of
the debts and the expenses of administration. (S3
R84 ). Hence the executor or administrator has all
the powers necessary for the administration of the
estate and which powers he can exercise without
leave of court.

Q.

May an executor or administrator enter into a
lease contract over estate property without
leave of court?

A.

Yes, the constitution of a lease contract over real or
personal property of the estate is an act of
administration and thus leave of court is not
required. This is true even if the lease of real
property would exceed one year since the
provisions of Article 1878(8) of the Civil Code on
agency should not apply to leases entered into by
an executor or administrator as they represent not
only the estate but the heirs and creditors as well.
(San Diego v. Nombre, 11 SCRA 165, 168-170
[1964]; see also 3 MANUEL MORAN, COMMENTS
ON THE RULES OF COURT 461-462 [1980 ed.]).

78

J9JC9B0M

RULE 85. ACCOUNTABILITY AND
COMPENSATION OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

May the executor/administrator profit by the
increase or lose by the decrease in value of the
estate?

A.

No executor or administrator shall profit by the
increase, or suffer loss by the decrease or
destruction, without his fault, of any part of the estate.
He must account for the excess when he sells any
part of the estate for more than the appraisement,
and if any is sold for less than the appraisement, he is
not responsible for the loss, if the sale has been justly
made. If he settles any claim against the estate for
less that its nominal value, he is entitled to charge in
his account only the amount he actually paid on the
settlement. (S2 R85).

Q.

Is the executor/administrator liable for uncollected
debts?

A.

No. No executor/administrator shall be accountable
for debts due the deceased which remain uncollected
without his fault. (S3 R85).

Q.

What expenses and fees are allowed the executor
or administrator?

A.

An executor/administrator is allowed the necessary
expenses of administration and for his services a
fee of P4 a day or a commission upon the value of
the estate disposed of by him in the payment of
debts, expenses, legacies, or distributive shares.
But where the estate is large and the settlement

79

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

has been attended with great difficulty, and has
required a high degree of capacity on the part of
the executor/administrator, a greater sum may be
allowed. (S7 R85). A compensation of PS00,000
was allowed where the administrator succeeded in
increasing the value of the estate from P890,00 to
P10,000,000. (Intestate Estate of Carmen de Luna
v. /AC, 170 S 246 [1989]).
Q.

If the executor or administrator is an attorney,
can he charge the estate professional fees for
his legal services?

A.

No. When the executor or administrator is an
attorney, he shall not charge aqainst the estate any professional fees for legal services rendered by
him. (S7 R85).

Q.

Atty. Bermudo filed a petition for his
appointment as administrator of the estate of
Artemio Hilario and for the allowance and
probate of the latter's will before the RTC of
Angeles City. The testator instituted Roxas as
his only heir but several persons, who claimed
to be Hilario's relatives, opposed the petition.
The RTC rendered a decision, allowing the will
and recognizing Roxasas Hilario's sole heir. On
appeal, the CA affirmed the RTC decision. The
SC sustained the CA decision.
When the decisionconstituting Roxasas the
sole heir becamefinal, Atty. Bermudowho also
served as counsel for her in the actions
concerning her inheritancefiled a motion to fix
his legal fees and to constitute a charging lien
against the estate for the legal services he

80

J9JC9B0M

RULE 85
Accountability And Compensation Of
Executors And Administrators

rendered. Roxas contends that under 57 R85
when the executor or administrator is an attorney,
he shall not charge against the estate any
professional fees for legal services rendered by
him. Is Roxas' contention correct?
A.

No. Atty. Bermuda did not only serve as administrator
of the estate. He also served as Roxas' counsel in
the suit that assailed her right as sole heir. Atty.
Bermuda brought the contest all the way up to this
Court to defend her rights to her uncle's estate. And
Atty. Bermuda succeeded. Acting as counsel in that
suit for Roxas was not part of his duties as
administrator of the estate. Consequently, it was but
just that he is paid his attorney's fees. (Bermuda v.
Tayag-Roxas, 2 February 2011 ).

Q.

May a probate court order a bank to release the
proceeds of a foreign currency deposit without
the consent of the co-depositor?

A.

No since it would violate Sec. 8 of the Foreign
Currency Deposit Act which states that a foreign
currency deposit is exempt from court process.
(Pacioles v. Pacioles, 15 Oct 2018, Tijam, J.).

Q.

Olivia was designated executrix in the will of the
deceasedAdela. Olivia then engaged the services
of the Salonga Law Firm in connection with the
settlement of Adela's estate.Theretainer provided
for the payment to the law firm of 3% of the gross
value of the estate as fees upon court approval of
the agreement for the distribution of the estate.
The law firm in behalf of the executrix filed a
petition for probate of Adela's will and settlement
of her estate. Adela's will was allowed probate.
Requestsby the law firm upon Olivia for payment
81

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of its fees went unheeded.Later the law firm filed
a motion for the issuance of writ of execution
against the estate in respect of the 3% fee. While
notice of the motion was given Olivia, no notice
was given the other legateesand devisees.Olivia
opposed the motion. The probate court denied
the motion on the ground that the law firm's claim
for payment of its fees could only be directed
against the executrix in her personalcapacity and
that the claim was prematuresince there was no
court-approveddistribution agreementyet.
a) May the law firm direct its claim against the
estate rather than the executrix?
b) Should the motion for issuance of writ of
execution be granted?
c) Is the motion premature?
A.
a) Yes. The Supreme Court has held that the lawyer
should first seek payment from the executor or
administrator who is primarily liable. However if
the executor or administrator refuses to pay the
lawyer, the latter has two alternatives in collecting
fees for legal services rendered in settling an
estate. First the lawyer may file a separate suit
against the executor or administrator in the latter's
personal capacity. Second the lawyer may file a
direct claim against the estate itself for recovery of
the fees as administration expenses.

82

J9JC9B0M

RULE 85
Accountability And Compensation Of
Executors And Administrators

b) No. When a lawyer files a direct claim against
the estate, there should be notice to all
interested persons so that they may have the
opportunity to challenge the propriety or the
reasonablenessof the fees. In this case, the law
firm did not give notice of the motion to the
legatees and devisees.
c) No the motion is not premature. The nature of
the second recourse is not contractual unlike
the first which is based on the agreement
between the lawyer and the executor or
administrator. The second recourse is based
rather on the fact that the lawyer's fees are to
be treated as administration expenses and
hence to be paid ahead of the claims of the
heirs, devisees, and legatees. Hence the same
is not bound by the contingency required in the
retainer agreement. ( Sa/onga Hernandez &
Al/ado v. Pascual, G.R. 127165, 2 May 2006.).
In that case while the SC said the motion for
execution may be denied outright, in order to
avoid further delay, the SC simply required the
law firm to give notice of the motion to all
interested parties.

83

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86. CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE
Q.

Discuss in brief the bifurcated approach of the
law to a money claim and a non-money claim
against the deceased.

A.

Under the Civil Code, rights and obligations of a
person which are not extinguished by his death are
transmitted to his heirs by operation of law or by will
(Art. 774 & 776, Civil Code). Obligations, whether
money or non-money debts, are transmitted to the
heirs. An important nuance is however laid down by
our procedural law with respect to monetary
obligations (money claims). Under Rules 88 to 90 of
the Rules of the Court, money debts are, properly
speaking, not transmitted to the heirs nor paid by
them. The estate pay them; it is only what is left after
the debts are paid that are transmitted to the heirs.
The distinction is not only academic but has
practical implications. Thus if a decedent left no
assets or estate, his heirs are not obliged to pay his
money debts. On the other hand, even if the
decedent left no estate, the heirs are bound to deliver
a car to the vendee which the decedent had sold.
Different procedural rules apply to a money
claim as against a non-money claim, the main
reason being that money claims should be
expeditiously resolved so that the residue of the
estate may be distributed to the heirs. Thus money
claims are subject to statute of non-claims and the
procedure for their enforcement is summary in
character. On the other hand since non-money
claims are litigious in nature, for them to be settled in
the probate proceedings would naturally embarrass

84

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

and impede these proceedings and detract from
their summary character. Hence they are threshed
out in a separate action. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS).
Q.

What are money claims?

A.

The following are money claims: (CFSJ)
1) All claims for money against the decedent, arising
from _gontract, express or implied, whether the
same be due, not due, or contingent;
2) All claims for funeral expenses;
3) All claims for expenses for the last ~ickness of
the decedent; and
4) Judgment for money against the decedent. (SS R86).

Q.

What are the money claims arising from contract,
express or implied, referred to in SS R86?

A.

The Supreme Court has held that these refers to all
money claims arising out of contract, quasicontract, or law but do not refer to those arising
from crime or quasi-delict. (Aguas v. Llemos, 5
SCRA 959). Claims for money which are founded
on tort or crime are not money claims and should
thus be filed against the executor/administrator or
against the heirs.

Q.

Maclan incurred necessary expenses as a
possessor of a land owned by Mariano. Mariano
died and Garcia inherited the land. Maclan filed a
civil case against Garcia to recover the necessary
expenses. Garcia filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that the claim was barred by the statute of
non-claims, the probate proceedings for the

85

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

settlement of Mariano's estate having long been
closed. Maclan opposed the motion contending
that his claim did not arise from a contract,
express or implied. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?

A.

Yes. The right of a possessor to recover necessary
and useful improvements arises from a quasi-contract
under Article 2172, in relation to Article 546 of the
Civil Code. A quasi-contract is considered as an
implied contract within the purview of 85 R86. Hence
the claim for money grounded on a quasi-contract is
considered a contractual money under 85 R86.
(Mac/an v. Garcia, 97 Phil. 119).

Q.

SHC filed with the Quezon City RTC a complaint
for delivery of lumber and/or damages against
AMC. SHC alleged that it delivered the crossed
Metro Bank checks payable to AMC through Chua,
AMC's general manager, but the lumber was never
delivered to it. In the meantime Chua died and the
proceeding for the settlement of his estate was
filed and was pending with the Pasay RTC.
In its answer, AMC alleged that it did not
know of the transaction and that Chua had
deposited the checks to his Metrobank account
under the name of Ayala Lumber, a sole
proprietorship owned by Chua, and encashed it.
AMC filed a third-party complaint against
Metrobank for allowing the deposit of the checks
to Ayala Lumber. In its answer to the third-party
complaint,
Metrobank
alleged
that Chua
represented to it that the arrangement of
depositing the checks to Ayala Lumber's
account was with AMC's consent and that AMC
was estopped from questioning such deposits.
86

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

Metrobank then filed a motion for leave to
admit fourth-partycomplaintagainst the estate of
Chua. In its fourth-party complaint, Metrobank
prayed that Chua's estate reimburse Metrobank in
case it would be held liable in the third-party
complaint filed against it by AMC. Should the RTC
grant leave to file the fourth-party complaint?
A.

No. The fourth-party complaint is in the nature of a
contractual money claim under S5 R86 which
should have been filed as a money claim in the
probate court of Pasay City. A quasi-contract is
considered as a contractual money claim (Mac/an
v. Garcia, 97 Phil. 119).
Here the action of Metrobank against the estate
of Chua is based on the quasi-contract of so/utio
indebiti. Art. 2154 of the Civil Code provides that if
something is received when there is no right to
demand it and it was unduly delivered by mistake, the
obligation to return it arises. Metrobank acted in a
manner akin to a mistake when it deposited the AMC
checks to Ayala Lumber's account; because of
Chua's control over AMC's operations, Metrobank
assumed that the checks payable to AMC could be
deposited to Ayala Lumber's account.
Being a money claim, Metrobank's claim for
relief should have been filed in the probate
proceedings before the Pasay City RTC. Hence the
QC RTC had no authority to adjudicate the fourthparty complaint. (Metrobank v. Absolute Management
Corp., 9 January 2013).11

"Metrobank also argued that its claim for reimbursement against the
estate of Chua should be allowed under S11 R6 which allows the filing of a
fourth-party complaint for contribution, indemnification or any other relief. The
SC said that S5 R86, being the special law for money claims, prevails over the
general provisions of S11 R6.

87

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Are claims for unpaid taxes by the government
included in money claims?

A.

No. In fact they must be paid first before the estate
is distributed and where the estate is distributed
without the taxes being paid, the taxes may be
enforced against the distributees in proportion to
their shares in the inheritance. (Gov't v. Pamintuan,
55 Phil. 13).

Q.

Romualdez sued Tiglao for unpaid rentals.
Judgment was rendered in favor of Romualdez.
The judgment was not satisfied notwithstanding
the issuance of a writ  of execution. In the
meantimeTiglao died and probate proceedingsfor
the settlement of her estate took place. After the
lapse of 5 years from the entry of judgment but
within 10 years therefrom, Romualdezfiled a civil
case against the administrator of Tiglao's estate
for the revival of the judgment. The administrator
filed a motion to dismiss the action for revival
invoking 51 R87which states that no action upon
a claim for recovery of money shall be
commencedagainst the executor or administrator
and that the remedyof Romualdezwas to present
his claim in the probate proceedings.Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. The original judgment has become stale
because of its non-execution after the lapse of 5
years. (S6 R39). Accordingly,it cannot be presented
against the estate of Tiglao unless it is first revived
by action. This is precisely why Romualdez has
instituted the action for revival whose object is not to
make the estate of Tiglao pay the sums of money
adjudged in the first judgment but merely to keep
alive said judgment so that the sums therein
88

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

awarded can be presented as claims against the
estate in the probate proceedings. (Romualdez v.
Tiglao, 105 SCRA 72 [1981]). Note: Romualdez
should file a contingent claim with the probate court
within the Statute of Non-Claims in order to preserve
his rights over the judgment.
Q.

If a claim against the decedent is not among
those referred to in SS R86, where should such
a claim be filed?

A.

Such a claim should be filed in an action against the
executor or administrator or against the heirs.
Hence actions to recover real or personal property
from the estate, or to enforce a lien thereon, and
actions to recover damages for an injury to person
or property shall be brought against the executor or
administrator. (S1 R87).

Q.

Where and within what time should a money
claim be filed?

A.

A money claim should be filed before the probate
court and within the time stated in the notice which
the probate court shall issue immediately after
granting letters testamentary or of administration. The
notice shall require all persons having money claims
against the decedent to file them in the office of the
clerk of said court. (S1 R86). Such time shall not be
less than 6 months nor more than 12 months after the
date of the first publication of the notice. This period is
also known as the statute of non-claims.

Q.

Should the notice be publishedand posted?

A.

Yes. Every executor or administrator shall, immediately
after the notice to creditors is issued, cause the same
to be published 3 weeks successively in a newspaper

89

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of general circulation in the province, and to be posted
for the same period in 4 public places in the province
and in 2 public places in the municipality where the
decedent last resided. (S3 R86).
Q.

What is the effect if a money claim is not filed
within the statute of non-claims?

A.

They are barred forever.

Q.

P died while riding in the bus operated by D. D
subsequently died and a petition for the
settlement of his estate was filed in court. After
granting letters of administration, the probate
court issued a notice requiring all persons having
money claims against the decedent to file them in
court within 6 months from the first publication of
the notice. The 6-month period expired. Later the
heirs of P broughta suit against the administrator
of D's estate for damages arising from the death
of P. May the action be dismissed?

A.

Yes, the action for damages against the heirs of D
may be dismissed.
Under the Rules on Special Proceedings, a
money claim arising from a contract should be filed
within the Statute of Non-Claims otherwise the
same shall be barred.
Here the action is a claim for money based on
the contract of carriage and was not filed within the
Statute of Non-Claims, which in this case was 6
months from the publication of the first notice. Even
if the action was filed after the settlement of the
estate of the deceased operator, the suit cannot be
maintained against his heirs, as the distributes of
his estate, since that may be done only if a
90

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

contingent claim had been filed in the probate
proceedings in accordance with S5 R88. Hence it is
barred by the statute of non-claims and thus the
action may be dismissed. (De Bautista v. De
Guzman, 25 November 1983).
Q.

Are there exceptions to the rule that a money
claim not filed within the statute of non-claims
is barred forever?

A.

Yes, there are two exceptions. The first is in the
case of the so-called tardy claim. At any time before
an order of distribution is entered, on application of
a creditor who has failed to file his claim within the
statute of non-claims, the court, may, for cause
shown and on such terms as are equitable, allow
such claim to be filed within a time not exceeding
one month from the order of the court allowing the
filing of such particular claim. (S2 R86). Claimant
must show good cause for the delayed filing.
A tardy claim involves a two-step process.
First the claimant files a motion for leave to file a
tardy claim with the probate court at any time
before an order of distribution is entered. The
motion must show good cause for the delay in the
filing. Second if the motion for leave is granted, the
claimant then files the tardy claim within a period of
one month from notice of the order of the court
granting leave to file the tardy claim. (2 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
63 [9th rev. ed., 3rd printing]).
The second is when the administrator or
executor brings an action against the claimant. In
such a case the claimant may raise the money claim
as a counterclaim, even if beyond the statute of non91

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

claims and recover thereon if he is able to prove his
claim. (S5 R86; 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 60 [61h rev. ed.]).
Q.

Is the fact that the claimant was unawareof the
estate proceedings a good cause to allow filing
of a tardy claim?

A.

No. The law presumes that they had such
knowledge because the settlement of estate is a
proceeding in rem and therefore the failure to file
their claims before such proceedings barred them
from subsequently filing the same claims outside
said proceedings. (See De Bautista v. De Guzman,
25 November 1983).

Q.

Is the fact that the claimant was negotiating
with one of the heirs for payment a good cause
to allow filing of a tardy claim?

A.

No. (Afan v. De Guzman, 107 Phil. 839 [1960]).

Q.

The decedent in his will acknowledged a
creditor's claim and ordered its payment. Does
this exempt the creditor from the requirementof
filing his claim within the statute of non-claims?

A.

No. ( Santos v. Manarang, 27 Phil. 209).

Q.

Give examples of a good cause for allowing the
filing of a tardy claim.

A.

Examples of a good cause for allowing the filing of a
tardy claim:
1) Where a claim of P31,000 was not presented
because the administrator made it appear that
the value of the estate did not exceed P1 ,300.
(In re Estate of Reyes, 17 Phil. 188).

92

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

2) Fraudulent omission of certain assets in the
inventory. (Barredo v. CA, 6 SCRA 620).
3) Where the judgment in favor of claimant was
rendered by the Court of Appeals on appeal
after the expiration of the statute of non-claims,
claimant arguing that she could not have filed a
money claim before since the trial court did not
award damages in her favor. (De Rama v.
Palileo, 26 February 1965).
Q.

Pampanga Bus Co. (Pambusco) filed a
complaint for sum of money against D. During
the pendency of the case, D died. Intestate
proceedings for the settlement of D's estate
commencedand notice to the estate's creditors
was given for them to file their claim within 6
months from the first publication of the notice.
A month after the notice was given, on
Pambusco's motion, the administrator of D's
estate was substituted for D in the civil case for
collection. The court rendered judgment in
favor of Pambuscoand D appealed. Pambusco
filed a contingent claim covering the judgment
award with the probate court. At the time of the
filing of the contingent claim, the 6-month
period for creditors to file their claim had
expired. In due course the judgment in favor of
Pambuscowas affirmed on appeal and became
final and thus Pambuscomoved that the estate
be ordered to pay Pambusco.The administrator
opposed the motion on the ground that the
claim is time-barred since the contingent claim
was filed beyond the statute of non-claims. Is
the claim of Pambuscotime-barred?

93

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A

No. Where the deceased was substituted by the
administrator in the civil action involving a money
claim, the estate is deemed to have notice of such
claim. The substitution of the deceased in the civil
action by the administrator or the decedent's
representativeis generally considered as equivalent
to the presentationof the claim with the probatecourt.
Under the circumstances, the filing of the contingent
claim ad abundantiorem cautelam was a mere
formality. (Ignacio v. Pampanga Bus Co., G.R.-No~[18936, 23 May 1967).

Q.

Cresenciosued Dioscoro for collection of a sum
of money. During the trial, but after the
presentation of plaintiff's evidence, Dioscoro
died. Atty. Cruz, Dioscoro's counsel then filed a
motion to dismiss the action on the ground of his
client's death. The court denied the motion to
dismiss and, instead, directed counsel to furnish
the court with the names and addresses of
Dioscoro's heirs and orderedthat the designated
administratorof Dioscoro's estate be substituted
as a representativeparty. After trial, the court
renderedjudgment in favor of Cresencio. When
the decision became final and executory,
Cresencio moved for the issuance of a writ of
execution against Dioscoro's estate to enforce
his judgment claim. The court issued the writ of
execution. Wasthe court's issuanceof the writ of
executionproper?Explain. (09 Bar Q7).

A

The court's issuance of the writ of execution was
not proper.
Under Section 20 of Rule 3, a favorable
judgment in a contractual money claim shall be
enforced in the manner especially provided in the
94

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

Rules for prosecuting claims against the estate of a
deceased person. Under Rule 86 of the Rules of
Court, a judgment for money should be filed as a
money claim with the probate court. The Supreme
Court has held that a money claim cannot be
enforced by a writ of execution but should instead
be filed as a money claim.
Q.

A filed a complaint against Y with the RTC of
Argao, Cebu, for paymentof a promissory note
in the sum of P350,000,for liquidated damages
of P10,000and attorney's fees of P50,000.After
he filed his answer, Y died, but his lawyer did
not file a motion to dismiss. In the meantime,
Y's widow filed with the above court a special
proceeding for the settlement of the intestate
estate of Y. The widow, Z, was appointed the
administratrix of the estate. A filed in the civil
case a motion to have Y substituted by the
administratrix; the latter did not object. The
court granted the motion. Trial on the merits
was had. In due' course, the court rendered a
decision in favor of A. At the time it was
rendered, the period to file claims in the
intestate estate of Y had already lapsed. The
administratrix, X, did not appeal from the
decision; and after it becamefinal, A moved for
the execution of judgment. Z opposed the
motion contending that the decision is void
becausethe claim does not survive. The case
should have been dismissed upon the death of
Y since upon his death, the court lost
jurisdiction over the case.
(a) Rule on the issue.

95

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b) If the opposition is without merit, can the
writ of execution be validly enforced?
(c) If it cannot be issued, what is the remedy of
A? (91 Bar Q10 ed).
A.
(a) The case should not be dismissed upon the
death of Y. Under the Rules of Civil Procedure,
upon the death of the defendant in a contractual
money claim before entry of final judgment, the
case shall not be dismissed but shall be allowed
to continue until final judgment. (820 R3).
(b) The writ of execution cannot be validly enforced.
Under Section 20 of Rule 3, a favorable
judgment in a contractual money claim shall be
enforced in the manner especially provided in the
Rules for prosecuting claims against the estate of a
deceased person. Under Rule 86 of the Rules of
Court, a judgment for money should be filed as a
money claim with the probate court. The Supreme
Court has held that a money claim cannot be
enforced by a writ of execution but should instead
be filed as a money claim.
(c) The remedy of A is to file the judgment for money
as a money claim with the probate court. The
substitution of the deceased in the civil action by
the administrator or the decedent's representative
is generally considered as equivalent to the
presentation of the claim with the probate court.
Hence the claim is not barred by the statute of
non-claims. (Ignacio v. Pampanga Bus Co., G.R.
No. L-18936, 23 May 1967).

96

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

Q.

In 1996 D borrowed PS00,000from P evidenced
by a promissory note which is payable on 5
March 2000. D died in 1998. In the proceedings
for the settlementof D's estate,the probate court
issued a notice for all creditors to file their claim
within 12 months from the first publication of the
notice. The 12-month period subsequently
expired. In April 2000 P filed with the probate
court a claim based on the promissory note
which had fallen due. The administrator filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground that P's action
had prescribed. How should the probate court
rule on the motion to dismiss?

A.

The probate court should grant the motion to dismiss.
A contractual money claim, whether due or
not, or contingent, should be filed within the statute
of non-claims otherwise the same would be barred.
(S5 R86).
Here the debt of D, even though not due,
should have been filed with the probate court within
the statute of non-claims.

Q.

Husband and wife were solidarily indebted for a
sum of money to plaintiff. The husband died. The
plaintiff sued the wife to collect on the loan. The
trial court dismissed the complaint on the
ground that under 56 R86,"where the obligation
of a decedent is solidary with another debtor, the
claim shall be filed against the decedent as if he
were the only debtor." Was the trial court's
dismissal of the suit proper?

A.

No. There is no compulsion for a creditor to file his
money claim with the probate court because he can
opt to go against the surviving solidary debtor in an

97

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

ordinary civil action. Article 1216 of the Civil Code
gives the creditor the right to "proceed against
anyone of the solidary debtors or some or all of
them simultaneously." 86 R86 cannot be made to
prevail over Article 1216 of the New Civil Code, the
former being merely procedural, while the latter is
substantive. (Boston Equity Resources v. Toledo,
19 June 2013, Perez, J.).
Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of the estate
of Alice, a contingent money claim for
commission in the event of the sale of properties
of the estate was filed by Alan with the probate
court. The executrix moved for the dismissal of
the claim on the ground that the docket fee under
57(a) R141 was not paid. The RTC dismissed the
money claim. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

No. The trial court has jurisdiction to act on a money
claim even without payment of separate docket
fees because the probate court had already
assumed jurisdiction over the proceeding for
settlement of the estate of the deceased. Nonpayment of the docket fee for a money claim is not
a ground for its dismissal. The probate court should
just order the payment of the docket fees within a
reasonable time. (Sheker v. Estate of Sheker, G.R.
No. 157912, 13 December2007).

Q.

Same facts as the previous question. The
executrix moved for the dismissal of the claim
on the ground that no certification against
forum shopping was attached thereto pursuant
to 55 R7. The RTC dismissed the money claim.
Was the dismissal proper?

98

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

A.

No. A certification against forum shopping is
required only for complaints and other initiatory
pleadings. A money claim against the estate is not
an initiatory pleading since the probate proceeding
was already inititated upon the filing of the petition
for the allowance of the decedent's will. A money
claim does not initiate new litigation but merely
brings a material but incidental matter arising in the
progress of a case. Hence a money claim is only
incidental to the probate proceeding, moreso if it is
contingent since the claimant cannot even institute
a separate action for a mere contingent claim.
(Sheker v. Estate of Sheker, G.R. No. 157912, 13
December 2007).

Q.

M et al., as human rights victims obtained a
favorable judgment against the estate of Pres.
Marcos in the amount of $1.98. They filed a
complaint with RTC for the enforcement of such
judgmentwhich has become final and executory.
The Marcos Estate filed a motion to dismiss for
non-payment of docket fees which it argued
should be based on the amount of the judgment
award sought to be enforced. M et al. countered
that an action to enforce a foreign judgment is
incapable of pecuniary estimation; hence the rate
of Php 610 is sufficient.Should the docket fees be
computed based on the amount of the judgment
award soughtto be enforced?

A.

No. S7(a) R141 relied upon by the RTC judge
covers only money claims against an estate not
based on a judgment. Although the complaint may
have been lodged against an estate, the schedule
of fees for cases incapable of pecuniary estimation
does not apply in the case at bar. Nonetheless, for
99

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

purposes of classification under the governing
procedural rule, this foreign judgment may be
subsumed under S7(b)(3) R141, or class of actions
not involving property. (Mijares v. Ranada, G.R. No.
139325, 12 April 2005).
Q.

In case the mortgagor dies, what are the three
options available to the mortgagee-creditor?

A.

The three options available to the mortgageecreditor under S? R86 are the following: (ARF)
1) ABANDON. The mortgagee-creditor may abandon
the security and prosecute his credit as a
money claim under R86. This option does not
make much sense since the mortgagee-creditor
will lose his preferred lien and become a
common creditor; unless the mortgaged property
has become worthless or its value has
depreciated considerably.
2) FORECLOSE. The mortgagee-creditor may
foreclose the mortgage. The suit should be filed
against the executor or administrator as party
defendant. This is not a money claim since it is
a suit to enforce a lien on personal or real
property. (S1 R87). If there is a deficiency, the
claim thereon may be filed as a money claim
with the probate court within the statute of nonclaims. Hence if the mortgagee-creditor expects
that there will be a deficiency, he should file
the deficiency claim as a contingent claim.
(2 Regalado 70).
3) RELY. The mortgagee-creditor may rely solely
upon his mortgage and foreclose it within the
prescriptive period of 10 years from the accrual of

100

J9JC9B0M

RULE 86
Claims Against The Estate

the right of action. (Art. 1142, Civil Code). The
mortgagee-creditor may decide not to foreclose
immediately but to just hold on to the mortgage. If
at the time the mortgagee-creditor decides to
foreclose the administration proceedings are still
ongoing, it is the executor/administrator who
should be made the defendant. If there is already
an order of distribution, then the heir or the
heirs to whom the property is allocated shall
be made the defendant. (Fernandez v. Aninias,
57 Phil. 737).
Q.

X borrowed P1 million from a bank secured by a
real estate mortgage. X defaulted in the
payment of the loan so the bank filed a judicial
foreclosure suit against X. During the pendency
of the case X died and was substituted by his
executor. In the probate proceedings, the court
issued a notice for creditors to file their claim
within 6 months from the first publication of the
notice. The bank did not file any money claim in
the probate court within the 6-month period.
Judgment in favor of the bank was rendered in
the foreclosure suit.
a)

Maythejudgmenton foreclosurebe enforced?

b) In due course the mortgaged property was
sold at the foreclosure sale but the proceeds
only amounted to P600,000.The bank filed a
motion for deficiency judgment but this was
opposed by the executor who argued that a
deficiency judgment is already barred by the
statute of non-claims. Is the executor's
contention correct?

101

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
a) Yes the judgment on foreclosure may be
enforced. An action to enforce a lien on property
is not a money claim which is barred by the
statute of non-claims. (See S1 R87).
b) Yes the executor's contention is correct. It has
been held that the possibility of recovering on a
deficiency judgment is a contingent claim which
should be filed within the statute of non-claims.
What the bank should have done was to file a
contingent claim for the probable deficiency with
the probate court within the 6-month period.
(PNB v. CA, 360 SCRA 370).

102

J9JC9B0M

RULE 87. ACTIONS BY AND AGAINST
EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

What actions may be brought against the
executor or administrator?

A.
1) Actions to recover real or personal property from
the estate;
2) Actions to enforce a lien on real or personal
property; and
3) Actions to recover damages for an injury to
person or property. (RIL)
Q.

Who has the standing to sue for the recovery or
protection of the property or rights of the
deceased?

A.

The executor or administrator. S2 R87 provides that
for the recovery or protection of the property or
rights of the deceased, an executor or administrator
may bring or defend, in the right of the deceased,
actions for causes which survive.

Q.

Pacita was the legitimate wife of Alonso who
died intestate in May 1995 but who left several
real properties located in 3 cities. Apart from
Pacita and her children (one of whom is Ed), the
demise of Alonso left in mourning his paramour
Dora and her 3 children. SubsequentlyDora and
her children executed a deed of extrajudicial
partition wherein they obtained title over 3
parcels of land in Dagupan City. When Ed
learned of this, he lost no time in instituting an
intestate proceeding before the RTCof Angeles
103

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

City wherein Ed prayed that he be appointedas
the administrator. Three days later without
waiting for his appointment, Ed and the other
heirs filed an action for annulment of the
extrajudicial settlement before the RTC of
Dagupan City. In their answer, Dora and her
children raised the affirmative defense that
Pacita and her children are not the real-partiesin-interest but rather the estate of Alonso in
view of the pendency of the administration
proceedings. Dora and her children asked that
the action for annulment be dismissed. Should
the judge dismiss the annulmentaction?
A.

No, the judge should not dismiss the annulment
action. Even if administration proceedings have
been commenced, the heirs may still bring the suit
if an administrator has not yet been appointed. In
such cases the heirs cannot be expected to wait for
the appointment of an administrator and do nothing
while the rights and properties of the decedent are
violated or dissipated. (Rioferio v. CA, G.R. 129008,
13 January 2004 ).

Q.

What are the instanceswhen the heirs may sue
for the recovery of estate property during the
pendencyof probate proceedings?

A.
1) If the executor/administrator
refuses to bring suit.

is

unwilling

or

2) When the executor/administrator is alleged to
have participated in the act complained of and
he is made a party-defendant.

104

J9JC9B0M

RULE 87
Actions By And Against
Executors And Administrators

3) When letters testamentary or of administration
have not yet been issued. (Into v. Valle, 9
December 2005).
Q.

Where an executor or administrator is unwilling
or refuses to bring a suit for the recovery of the
property or rights of the deceased, what
procedural recoursemay the heirs avail of?

A.

The heirs may bring the suit and implead the
executor or administrator as a co-defendant for
being an unwilling co-plaintiff, pursuant to 810 R3.
(Borromeo v. Borromeo, 98 Phil. 432; 2 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
76 [9th rev. ed.; 3rd printing]).

Q.

P sued D and obtained a favorable decision
which has become final and executory. The
sheriff sold, at public auction, the rights and
interest pro-indiviso of D over real properties,
which are subject of a special proceeding
wherein D is one of the heirs. P was the highest
bidder in the auction sale. D's co-heirs all then
filed a complaint for the declaration of nullity of
the sale in P's favor alleging that prior to the
auction sale, D had already waived her
hereditary share in favor of her co-heirs for
valuable consideration. Can D's co-heirs validly
file the complaint where the estate is already
representedby an administratrix?

A.

Yes. In the case, it was alleged in the complaint that
D's co-heirs are the children and the surviving
spouse of the decedent whose estate is subject of
the special proceedings. They claimed that the
sheriffs, without having legal custody of the share
or property of D, sold the properties at public
105

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

auction despite prior verbal notice to them that the
shares of D had already been conveyed. It is clear
therefore that the co-heirs seek to protect their
rights over the subject real properties as heirs of
the deceased. Their rights were violated when the
sheriffs sold the properties or interest therein.
Hence, it is not the estate which they represented
when they filed their complaint but their own. As
such, they can, by themselves file the instant
complaint. (Into v. Valle, 9 December 2005).
Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of
Dencio's estate before the RTC, Ernie was
appointed as administrator. Harry filed a
separate action for damages against Ernie on
the ground that Ernie was not taking steps to
prevent a riparian property of the estate from
being eroded by the river. Ernie filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground that Harry cannot file
a separate action against him. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. When an executor or administrator is
appointed and assumes the trust, no action to
recover the title or possession of lands or for
damages done to such shall be maintained against
him by an heir or devisee until there is a court order
assigning such lands to such heir or devisee or until
the time allowed for paying debts has expired. (S3
R87). The reason is that before the land has been
assigned to the heir or devisee, it is premature
for him to bring the action. Ernie may file a motion
with the probate court for the removal of Ernie on
the ground that he has become unsuitable to
discharge the trust.

106

J9JC9B0M

RULE 87
Actions By And Against
Executors And Administrators

Q.

D died and proceedings for the settlement of his
estate were commenced. The executor has it on
good information that X was holding a certificate
of title over D's property. Upon inquiry by the
executor, X feigns knowledge of the title. What
is the remedy of the executor?

A.

The executor may file a motion or application to cite
X to appear before the probate court and be
examined under oath regarding the matter. If X
refuses to appear before it or to answer on
examination or such interrogatories as are put to
him, the court may punish him for contempt and
may commit him to prison until he submits to the
order of the court.

Q.

If upon examination it is discovered that X is
indeed holding a certificate of title over D's
property, may the court order X to turn over the
certificate to the executor?

A.

No. An executor or administrator by mere motion in
the probate court cannot recover property claimed to
belong to the estate but in the possession of a third
party. The administrator has to bring an independent
action for this purpose against the third person
because he is not under the probate court's
jurisdiction. The third person may have defenses and
this should be threshed out in a full-blown hearing
and not in the summary proceeding of a probate
case. (De la Cruz v. Camon, 16 SCRA 886).

Q.

May the executor or administrator file an action
to recover property fraudulently conveyed by
the deceased in order to defraud his creditors?

107

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes if the estate is not sufficient to pay the debts
and expenses of administration. But he shall not be
bound to commence such action unless on
application of the creditors, nor unless the creditors
making the application pay such part of the costs
and expenses, or give security therefor to the
executor or administrator, as the court deems
equitable. (S9 R87).

Q.

May a creditor himself file such action?

A.

Yes with the court's permission, if the executor or
administrator has not commenced such action and
provided the creditor has filed in court a bond,
executed to the executor or administrator, in an
amount approved by the judge, conditioned to
indemnify the executor or administrator against the
costs and expenses incurred by reason of such
action. Where the conveyance or attempted
conveyance has been made by the deceased in
favor of the executor or administrator, the action
which the creditor may bring shall be in the name of
all the creditors, and court permission and the filing
of the bond are not necessary. (810 R87).

108

J9JC9B0M

RULE 88. PAYMENT OF THE
DEBTS OF THE ESTATE
Q.

May the testator in his will designate the part of
the estate from which the debts shall be paid or
make provision for the payment of debts?

A.

Yes, but if the provision made by the will or the
estate appropriated is not sufficient, such part of the
estate, real or personal, as is not disposed of by will
shall be appropriatedfor that purpose. (S2 R88).

Q.

Is there an order in which estate property is
charged for the payment of debts and expenses?

A.

Yes. First the part of the estate designated in the
will shall be charged for such payments. Second,
the personal estate of the deceased no disposed of
by will shall be chargeable with the payment of
debts and expenses. Third, if said personal estate
is not sufficient for that purpose, or its sale would
be detrimental to the participants of the estate, the
whole of the real estate not disposed of by will, or
so much thereof as is necessary, may be sold,
mortgaged, or otherwise encumbered for that
purpose by the executor or administrator, after
obtaining the court's authority. Any deficiency shall
be met by contributions from devisees, legatees, or
heirs who have entered into possession of portions
of the estate before the payment of debts and
expenses. (S3 R88).

Q.

What is the result if devisees, legatees, or heirs
enter into the possession of portions of the
estate before the debts and expenses have
been settled and paid?

109

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

They become liable to contribute for the payment of
such debts and expenses. The probate court may
after hearing issue an order settling the amounts of
their liabilities and order how much and in what
manner each person shall contribute, and may
issue a writ of execution to satisfy the contributive
shares. (S6 R88).

Q.

How are contingent claims
absolute satisfied?

A.

If the contingent claim becomes absolute and is
presented to the probate court as an absolute claim
within 2 years from the time limited for other
creditors to present their claims, it will be paid in the
same manner as the other absolute claims. After
said period, the creditor may proceed against the
distributees, provided such contingent claims had
been seasonably filed in and allowed by the
probate court.

which become

The property reserved for the payment of
contingent claims may be retained by the executor or
administrator only within the 2-year period.
Thereafter the same shall be distributed by court
order to the persons entitled to the same. (SS R88).
Q.

What is the order of payment if the estate is
insolvent?

A.

If the assets which can be appropriated for the
payment of the debts are not sufficient for that
purpose, the executor or administrator shall pay the
debts against the estate in accordance with the
provisions of Article 1059 and Articles 2239 to 2251
of the Civil Code on preference of credits. (S7 R88).

110

J9JC9B0M

RULE89. SALES,MORTGAGES,AND
OTHER ENCUMBRANCES OF
PROPERTY OF DECEDENT
Q.

May the probate court authorize the executor or
administratorto sell the whole or a part of the real
or personal estate, although not necessary to pay
debts, legacies, or administrationexpenses?

A.

Yes, when it appears that such sale will be
beneficial to the heirs, devisees, legatees, and
other interested persons, the court may, upon,
application of the executor or administrator and on
written notice to the heirs, devisees, and legatees
who are interested in the estate to be sold,
authorize the executor or administrator to sell the
whole or a part of said estate. But such authority
shall not be granted if inconsistent with the
provisions of the will. (S4 R89).

111

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90. DISTRIBUTION AND
PARTITION OF THE ESTATE
Liquidation of communityproperty or
conjugalpartnership upon death of spouse
Q.

Explain liquidation of the community property
or conjugal partnership property.

A.

Liquidation is the process undertaken upon the
dissolution of the absolute community property or the
conjugal partnership of gains. Basically it involves
taking an inventory of the community property or
conjugal partnership property, paying the debts of the
absolute community or the conjugal partnership,
delivering the exclusive property of the spouses, and
dividing the net remainder equally between them.
(Articles 102 and 129, Family Code).

Q.

How is the community property or conjugal
partnership property liquidated upon the
dissolution of marriage by death?

A.

When the marriage is dissolved by the death of the
husband or wife, the community property or the
conjugal partnership shall be liquidated in the same
proceedings for the settlement of the estate of the
deceased spouse. In this case, one half of the net
remainder shall pertain to the surviving spouse and
one half shall pertain to the estate of the deceased
spouse, to be distributed to the heirs, including the
surviving spouse after payment of debts and
charges. If both spouses have died, the liquidation
may be effected in the estate proceedings of either.
(S2 R73; Articles 103 and 130, Family Code).
112

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

If no judicial settlement proceeding is instituted,
the surviving spouse shall liquidate the community
property or conjugal partnership either judicially or
extrajudicially within one year from the death of the
deceased spouse. (Article 103 and 130, Family
Code). Such liquidation may be done judicially by an
action for partition under R69 or by extrajudicial
settlement under R74 provided there are no debts to
be paid. If there are debts, the surviving spouse has
no choice but to file a proceeding for the settlement of
the estate of the deceased spouse, in which case the
liquidation would be done in the same proceedings.
(ALICIA V. SEMPIO-DIY, HANDBOOK ON THE
FAMILY CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES 152 [1988]).
Partition and Distribution
Q. When may the court issue an order of distribution?
A.

Only after the payment of debts, estate taxes,
administration expenses, funeral charges, and the
allowance to the widow have been paid. (S1 R90).

Q.

51 R90 speaks of allowance to the widow as one of
the items which should be paid before distribution.
How about allowance to the children?

A.

While S1 R90 speaks only of allowances to the
widow, it should also include the allowances to the
minor and incapacitated children of the deceased as
the payment of such allowances during the pendency
of the administrative proceedings is specifically
authorized by S3 R83. (2 REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 99-100 [9th rev. ed.]).

113

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What does the order of distributionprovide?

A.

The order shall assign the residue of the estate to
the persons entitled to the same, naming them and
the proportions or parts to which each is entitled.
(S1 R90). The order of distribution must also be at
the same time a declaration of heirs since a
separate action for the declaration of heirship is not
proper. (Pimentel v. Palanca, 5 Phil. 436).

Q.

When is the issue of heirship to be determined?

A.

The issue of heirship is not to be determined until the
distribution stage of the proceedings. The exception
would be to determine entitlement or preference in
the appointment of the administrator in accordance
with the statutory order of preference. (Ngo The Hua
v. Chung Kiat Hua, 9 SCRA 113).

Q.

What is the right of the persons named as
distributees in the order of distribution?

A.

Such persons may demand and recover their respective
shares from the executor or administrator, or any other
person having the same in his possession. (S1 R90).

Q.

What if there is a controversy before the court
as to who are the lawful heirs of the deceased
person or as to the distributive shares to which
each person is entitled under the law?

A.

The controversy shall be heard and decided as in
ordinary cases. (S1 R90).

Q.

In the estate settlement proceedings,there was
a dispute as to whether Fe or Blandinawas the
surviving spouse of the decedent. Blandina
submitted copies of the foreign divorce decree
between Fe and the decedent to prove that Fe is
114

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

not the survrvmq spouse. The probate court,
eschewing a hearing, disregarded the foreign
divorce decree reasoning out that the same is
not recognized in the Philippines applying the
case of Tenchavez v. Escano which held that a
foreign divorce obtained by Filipino citizens is
not entitled to recognition. It then proceeded to
declare Fe as the surviving spouse. Did the
probate court act properly?
A.

No. The Supreme Court held that the action of the
probate court is a reversibleerror since the provision
of S 1 R90 is clear that if there is a controversyas to
who are the lawful heirs, such controversy shall be
heard and decidedas in ordinarycases.
Here Fe's citizenship at the time she obtained
the divorce decree was material for if she were an
American citizen, the foreign divorce would be valid
pursuant to Article 26 of the Family Code and she
would thus no longer be the surviving spouse. This
should have prompted the trial court to conduct a
hearing to establish Fe's citizenship.The purpose of
a hearing is to ascertain the truth of the matters in
issue with the aid of documentary and testimonial
evidence as well as the arguments of the parties
either supporting or opposing the evidence. Instead,
the lower court perfunctorilysettled her claim in her
favor by merely applying the ruling in Tenchavez v.
Escafio. This was in clear violation of S1 R90.
( Quita v. CA, 300 SCRA 406).

Q.

In an action for reconveyance and annulment of
title, the trial court declared that the questioned
deed of sale can be regarded as an advance
inheritance. What is proper for the trial court to
make such a declaration?
115

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. Questions as to advancement made, or alleged
to have been made, by the deceased to any heir
should be determined by the probate court having
jurisdiction over the estate proceedings. (S2 R90;
Natcher v. CA, 366 S 385 [2001 ]).

Q.

RespondentLourdes Pacanafiled an action for
recovery of a parcel of land against the
Petitioners who are the heirs of Teofilo
Gabatan.Respondentargues that she inherited
the land from her mother Hermogenawho in
turn inherited the same from her father Juan
Gabatan. However after the death of Juan, his
brother Teofilo took possession of the land and
after Teofilo's death, it was the Petitioners who
continued the possession. The RTC ruled in
favor of Respondent after making the finding
that Hermogenawas the daughter of Juan. Was
it proper for the RTC to make the finding that
Hermogenawas the daughter of Juan?

A.

No. Matters relating to the rights of filiation and
heirship must be ventilated in the proper probate
court in a special proceeding instituted precisely for
the purpose of determining such rights. They cannot
be adjudicated in an ordinary civil action, such as one
for recovery of property. The Court has consistently
ruled that the trial court cannot make a declaration of
heirship in the civil action for the reason that such a
declaration can only be made in a special proceeding.
(Gabatan v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 150206, 13
March 2009).

Q.

Petitioners filed a complaint for cancellation of
title and reconveyanceof real property against
Respondent. Petitioners alleged that they are
the lawful heirs of MagdalenoYpon (Magdaleno)
116

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

who died intestate and childless and that
Respondent had executed a fraudulent affidavit
of self-adjudicationclaiming to be the sole heir
of Magdaleno and thus was able to obtain title
in his name over the subject realty. Petitioners
prayed that the affidavit of self-adjudicationand
the certificate of title issued in Respondent's
name be nullified and that the real property be
reconveyed to them. Respondent filed a motion
to dismiss on the ground of failure to state a
cause of action. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?
A.

Yes. Petitioner's allegation that they are the lawful
heirs of Magdaleno is not enough to make them real
parties-in-interest since the determination of whether
they are lawful heirs can be made only in the
appropriate special proceeding and not in an ordinary
suit for cancellation of title and reconveyance. (Heirs
of Ypon v. Ricaforte, 8 July 2013, citing Gabatan v.
Court of Appeals, 581 SCRA 70 [2009]; Heirs of
Yaptinchay v. def Rosario, 304 SCRA 18 [19991).
Hence the complaint may be dismissed for failure
to state a cause of action.

Q.

When may the need to institute a separate
special proceeding for the determination of
heirship be dispensed with?

A.

By way of exception, such a need may be dispensed
with for the sake of practicality, as when the parties
in the civil case had voluntarily submitted the issue
to the trial court and already presented their
evidence regarding the issue of heirship, and the
RTC had consequently rendered judgment thereon,
or when a special proceeding had been instituted but
had been finally closed and terminated, and hence,
117

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

cannot be re-opened. (Heirs of Ypon v. Ricaforte, 8
July 2013). In an action for recovery of ownership
and possession of land, the court could pass upon
the issue of heirship if the parties voluntarily
submitted such issue to the court. (Heirs of Fabillar
v. Pal/er, 21 January 2019, Perlas-Bernabe,J.).
Also, where the status of the plaintiff as heir is
indisputable or uncontroverted ( as is usually the

situation in cases of a legitimate child or surviving
spouse), a prior declaration of heirship is not
required. (Heirs of Basbas v. Basbas, 734 SCRA
625, 634 [2014]; Raymundo v. Vda. De Suarez,
572 SCRA 384, 406-407 [2008]). Hence there was
no need for a prior declaration of heirship before a
daughter may commence an action arising from
any right of her predecessor, such as one for
annulment of mortgage. (Gloria v. Builders Savings
& Loan Assoc., 4 June 2018, Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

Donata Lardizabal is the original owner of a parcel
of registered land. Her heirs sold the land to
plaintiffs. Plaintiffs sued defendants for annulment
of title. In their complaint, the Plaintiffs allege that
they are innocent purchasers for value of the
land. Defendants contend that status of heirs of
Donata must first be established in a special
proceeding. Is the Defendants' contention correct?

A.

No. There is no prior requirement that status of
heirs of Donata be first established in a special
proceeding if plaintiffs base their right of action not
on the fact of their seller's heirship to Donata but on
their own rights as innocent purchasers for value.
(Limos v. Odones, 11 August 2010).

118

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

Q.

Norberto Bas bought a land. Norberto died
without a will and his property was inherited by
his sole heir Lolita Bas Capablanca.Later Lolita
learned that a reconstituted title over the land
was obtained by the heirs of Pedro Bas. Lolita
sued the heirs of Pedro Bas for cancellation of
the title. The heirs filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that there must be a prior declaration
of heirship of Lolita to Norberto. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. There is no need for separate declaration of
heirship where plaintiff's right is primarily based on
the sale of the land to her predecessor, not
succession. Plaintiff's claim is anchored on a sale
of the property to her predecessor-in-interest and
not on any filiation with the original owner. What
plaintiff is pursuing is Norberto's right of ownership
over the property which was passed to her upon
the latter's death. The Court has stated that no
judicial declaration of heirship is necessary in order
that an heir may assert his or her right to the
property of the deceased. (Capablanca v. Bas, 28
June 2017, Leanen, J.)

Q.

Margarita died and probate proceedings for the
allowance of her will were instituted. In her will,
Margaritaleft all her property to her two children,
Vicente and Benito. During the pendency of
probate case, Juana instituted an ordinary action
alleging that the two children of Margarita were
illegitimate and that she was the sole heir. The
prayer of her complaint was that she be declared
the lawful heir and entitled to all the property of
Margarita. May the trial court in the second case
pass upon the issue of the heirship to the estate
of Margarita?
119

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. Where there is a pending probate proceeding,
a separate action for the declaration of heirs is not
proper. It is the probate court which has the power
to determine the issue of heirship. (Pimentel v.
Palanca, G.R. No. L-2108, 18 December 1905).

Q.

The late Anastacia Abangan and Raymundo
Cabellon were allegedly married in February
1873.A delayed registration of the marriagewas
entered in the records of the civil registrar and a
certificate of marriage issued sometime in
September 2007 or 134 years after their
purported matrimonial bond. The petition for
late registration was filed by respondents who
were allegedly the true legal heirs and
descendantsof Anastaciaand Raymundo.
On 19 May 2008, the United Abangan Clan
filed a Petition seeking the cancellation of the
entry in the Register of Marriages. On the other
hand, respondents arguedthat petitioner was
engaged in forum shopping, since the fact of
marriage between Anastacia and Raymundo
was an important issue to be resolved in
another case. Docketedas Sp. Proc. No. 16171CEB,the case involved a petition for the judicial
declaration of the heirs of decedent Anastacia
(first petition) filed also by the petitioner.
The RTC dismissed the petition for
cancellation of the entry in the register of
marriages(second petition) on the ground of litis
pendentia. According to the trial court, the first
petition (SP. PROC. No. 16171-CEB)and the
second petition (SP. PROC. No. 16180-CEB),
which were both initiated by petitioner, involved
the same parties and concernedthe sameissues
120

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

and reliefs prayed for. Did the trial court correctly
dismiss the petition for cancellation of entry on
the ground of lis pendens?
A.

No. There is no identity and similarity between the first
and the second petitions with respect to the issues
under litigation. The action in the first petition involves
a judicial declaration of heirship, while the main issue
in the second petition pertains to a cancellation of
entry in the civil register. In the former, what is
established is a party's right of succession to the
decedent; in the latter, among those settled are the
issues of nationality, paternity, filiation, legitimacy of
the marital status, and registrability of an event
affecting the status or nationality of an individual.
Because the respective subject matters in the two
actions differ, any decision that may be rendered in
one of them cannot constitute res judicata in the
other. A judicial declaration of heirship is inconclusive
on the fact of occurrence of an event registered or to
be registered in the civil register, while changes in the
entries in the civil register do not in themselves
settle the issue of succession. (United Abangan Clan
Inc. v. Sabellano-Sumagang, G.R. No. 186722,
18 June 2012).

Q.

Is there such a proceeding as an action for
declaration of heirship?

A.

Yes. An action
for declaration of heirship
(declaracion de herederos) refers to a special
proceeding in which a person claiming the status of
heir seeks prior judicial declaration of his or her
right to inherit from a decedent. (Id.).

12

12Since
this is a special proceeding, the more precise term is "proceeding
for declaration of heirship" rather than "action for declaration of heirship."

121

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
-----~-

Q.

Explain a project of partition.

A.

The heirs may by agreement submit a project of
partition to serve as the basis of the order of
distribution. The heirs who do not agree thereto may
submit a counter-project of partition. If approved by the
court, the same will serve as the basis of the order of
distribution. The court order approving the project may
at the same time serve as the order of distribution. (2
FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 100 [91h rev. ed., 3rd printing]).

Q.

When and how do you appeal from an order of
distribution?

A.

An order of distribution is appealable within 30 days
from notice by filing both a notice of appeal and a
record on appeal with the probate court. This is
because the order of distribution involves multiple
or separate appeals. The probate court still needs
to hold on to the original records since motions to
file leave for tardy claims may still be filed at any
time before the entry of the order of distribution.
(See 82 R86).

Q.

A project of partition was filed with the probate
court dividing the estate between the surviving
spouse and the adopted daughter in the
proportion of 5/8 and 3/8, respectively. The court
issued an order approving the project of
partition which was received by the surviving
spouse and the adopted daughter. More than
two months later, the surviving spouse filed a
motion for correction of the project of partition
claiming that the partition was erroneous since
under jurisprudence, the share in case of
intestacy of the surviving spouse concurring

122

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

with only one legitimate child is % of the estate
and thus he should have gotten % (% + %) of the
property partitioned
. Should the motion for
correction of the project of partition be granted?

A.

No. Since the order approving the project of
partition had already become final, the probate
court may no longer amend the same. (Imperial v.
Munoz, 58 SCRA 678 [1974]).

Q.

If the order of distribution affects registered
land, should the same be registered?

A.

Yes, once the same becomes final. Proof of
payment or exemption from estate tax shall be
presented to the register of deeds as a requirement
for registration. Upon the presentation of the
owner's duplicate certificate of title, new certificates
of title shall be issued to the parties entitled thereto
in accordance with the approved partition and
distribution. (Sec. 92, P.O. No. 1529).

Q.

May a probate court issue writs of execution?

A. The general rule is that a probate court cannot
issue writs of execution because its orders as a rule
refer to the adjudication of claims against the estate
which the executor or administrator may satisfy
without the need of executory process. There are
however four instances wherein a probate court
may issue a writ of execution. (PECS)
1) CONTRIBUTIVESHARES.Where devisees,
legatees, or heirs have entered into possession of
portionsof the estate before the debts and expenses
have been settled and paid, and have become liable
to contribute for the payments of such debts and
expenses, the probate court may issue writs of
123

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

execution to satisfy the contributive shares of such
devisees, legatees, or heirs. (S6 R88). Where the
heirs had already received their shares in the estate,
the probate court may issue a writ of execution to
compel them to pay their respective shares to satisfy
unpaid debts of the estate. (Ignacio v. Elchico, G.R.
No. L-18937, 16 May 1967).
2) EXAMINATION COSTS. To satisfy the
costs when a person is cited for examination in
probate proceedings. (S13 R142).
3) PARTITION EXPENSES. To satisfy the
expenses of partition which the parties may
become liable in proportion to their respective
shares and interest. (S3 R90). (2 REGALADO 12).
4) SURETY'S LIABILITY ON BONDS. To
enforce liability of sureties under bonds filed with
the probate court. ( Cosme de Mendoza v. Pacheco,
64 Phil. 134 ).
Closure
Q.

When is the order of closure issued by the
probate court?

A.

After the payment of all debts and the delivery of the
estate to the heirs. This is because the probate court
loses jurisdiction of an estate under administration
only after such payment and delivery. The finality of
the order of distribution or of the approval of the
project of partition does not yet terminate the
proceedings. (Siguion v. Tecson, 89 Phil. 28).

124

J9JC9B0M

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition Of The Estate

Q.

May the order of closure be appealed? If so within
what period and how shall the appeal be taken?

A.

The order of closure may be appealed since it is a
final order which affects the substantial rights of the
person appealing. (S1[f] R109). The appeal shall be
taken within 15 days by filing a notice of appeal. A
record on appeal is not required since it does not
involve a multiple or separate appeals as there is
nothing more left to be done by the probate court.

Q.

What is the remedy of an heir entitled to the
residue of the estate but not given his share?

A.

Where an heir who has been duly notified of the
proceedings is not included or not given any share
in the order of distribution, he must move for
reconsideration or appeal therefrom within 30 days
from notice, otherwise the order becomes final.
Where the heir and his address is known to the
petitioner, but no notice was given to him, the heir
can file an action to annul the judgment. The failure
to notify him deprives the probate court of
jurisdiction to render a valid judgment.
Where the heir or his address is unknown and
no personal notice was given to him, he can file a
motion with the probate court for the delivery of his
share or to re-open the proceedings if the order of
closure is not yet final. If the order of closure has
become final, the remedy of the heir is to file an
action for reconveyance against the distributees.13

131n

this case, a prior declaration of heirship is not required since the
probate proceedings had been closed and terminated. (See Heirs of Ypon v.
Ricaforle, 8 July 2013).

125

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Where the heir is given a share in the order of
distribution, he may move for the delivery of the
same to him, even after the closure of the
proceedings, subject to acquisitive prescription in
favor of adverse possessors. The provisions of 86
R39 do not apply to special proceedings. (Rodi/ v.
Benedicto, 95 SCRA 137 [1980)).

126

J9JC9B0M

OTHER SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
RULE 91. ESCHEATS
Q.

What is escheat?

A.

It is the special proceeding instituted by the Solicitor
General or his representative in behalf of the
Republic to obtain title over the personal or real
estate of a person who dies intestate leaving no
heir or person entitled to the same. (S1 R91 ).

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction
overescheatproceedings?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Act
of 1948, which provides that the Court of First
Instance (now RTC) shall have original and
exclusive jurisdiction over special proceedings not
otherwise provided for by law. This provision was
not repealed by B.P. Big. 129.

Q.

May the estate of the decedent be escheated
even if he died testate?

A.

No, since the probateof a will is mandatory. However
if the will is disallowed by a probate court and such
order has become final, it is as if the decedent died
intestate and his estate may be escheated if he has
no heir or person entitledto the estate.

Q.

In an intestate estate proceeding, the probate
court found that the decedent left no heirs or
persons entitled to his estate. Could the probate
court then and there decree that the estate be
awarded to the State?
127

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. The proper escheat proceedings must be
brought in which the requirements under R91 (like
publication once a week for 6 consecutive weeks)
should be complied with. (De Guzman v. Sevilla, 47
Phil. 891 [197 4]).

Q.

Outline in brief the procedure in an escheat
proceeding.

A.
1) When a person dies intestate leaving real or
personal estate but with no heir or person
entitled to the same, the Solicitor General or his
representative in behalf of the Republic may file
a petition with the RTC of the place where the
deceased last resided or in which he had
estate, if the deceased is a non-resident.
2) The court shall fix a date and place for the
hearing which shall not be more than 6 months
from the entry of the order and shall direct that a
copy of the order be published at least once a
week for 6 consecutive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation.
3) The court shall adjudge that the estate of the
deceased in the Philippines, after the payment
of debts and charges, shall be escheated.
Q.

May an heir or person entitled to the estate
recover the same after its escheat?

A.

Yes, provided the claim is filed within 5 years from
the date of the judgment.14 In such a case the

"Articte 1014 of the Civil Code reckons the 5-year period "from the date
the property was delivered to the State." It is opined that it is the Civil Code
provision which prevails since prescription is a matter of substantive not

128

J9JC9B0M

RULE 91
Esch eats

claimant shall have title to and possession of the
property. If the property had been sold, the city or
municipality shall be accountable to the claimant for
the proceeds, after deducting reasonable charges
for the care of the estate. A claim not made within
the 5-year period shall be forever barred.
Q.

What is an action for reversion?

A.

An action brought by the Republic to recover
properties alienated in violation of the Constitution
or of any statute. (S5 R91 ). Lands of the public
domain and real rights thereto which were acquired
in violation of the Constitution or the public land
laws shall also be reverted to the State. (Sec. 21,
Article XVIII, Constitution).

Q.

The Republic filed with the RTC of Parafiaque
City an action for reversion against Yujuico
involving a land in Parafiaque with an assessed
value of more than P50,000. The Republic
contended that the judgment of the CFI of
Pasig, acting as a land registration court, which
decreed the issuance of an OCT over the land is
a nullity since the land was under water and
thus part of the Manila Bay. Does the RTC have
jurisdiction over the action for reversion?

A.

No. Under B.P. Big. 129, the Court of Appeals has
exclusive original jurisdiction over actions for the
annulment of judgments of the RTC.

procedural law. A suggestion to the bar examinee is to cite S4 R91 if the
question is in Remedial Law and Article 1014 if the question is in Civil Law.

129

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Here the action at bottom seeks to nullify the
judgment of the CFI, acting as a land registration
court, on the ground that a land registration court
cannot issue a title over property of the public
domain. Hence it is the Court of Appeals which has
original exclusive jurisdiction pursuant to Sec. 9(2)
of B.P. Big. 129. (Yujuico v. Republic, G.R. No.
168861, 26 October 2007).

130

J9JC9B0M

RULE 92. GUARDIANSHIP (VENUE)
Q. What are the three kinds of guardians under the law?
A.

There are three kinds of guardians under the law:
1) The legal guardian. One who is such by
provision of law without the need of a court
appointment. The father and mother shall jointly
exercise legal guardianship over the person and
the property of their unemancipated common
child without the need of a court appointment.
(S1 Rule on Guardianship of Minors).
2) The guardian ad /item. One who is appointed by
the court for purposes of a particular action or
proceeding involving a minor.
3) The general guardian. One who is appointed by
the court over the person and/or property of the
ward to represent the latter in all his civil acts
and transactions.

Q.

Who may be put under guardianship and what
does the guardianshipcover?

A.

Two kinds of persons may be put under guardianship:
minors and incompetents. The guardianship may be
over their (a) persons, (b) property, or (c) both persons
and property. If the minor or ward is a non-resident, the
guardianship may be with respect only to the minor's
or ward's property. (See S6 R93, S3 RGM).

Q.

What rules govern guardianship?

A.

Rule on guardianship of minors now governed by
the SC Rule on Guardianship of Minors (RGM)

131

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

effective 1 May 2001. Rules 92 to 97 are still
applicable to guardianship over incompetents.
Q.

Who are incompetents for purposes of the rules
on guardianship?

A.

Incompetent
includes
persons suffering civil
interdiction, hospitalized lepers, prodigals, deaf and
dumb who are unable to read and write, and those
who are of unsound mind (even though with lucid
intervals). Also persons not being of unsound mind
but by reason of weak mind, age, disease, or other
similar causes (WADO) cannot, without outside aid,
take care of themselves and manage their property,
becoming thereby an easy prey for deceit and
exploitation. (S2 R92).

Q.

What is the jurisdiction and
guardianshipproceeding?

A.

Guardianship over incompetents: RTC of the place
where the incompetent resides. If a non-resident,
with the RTC of the place where the incompetent's
property or part thereof is situated.

venue

of a

Guardianship over minors. Family Court of the
place where the minor resides. If a non-resident, with
the Family Court of the place where the minor's
property or part thereof is situated. (S3 RGM).
Take note that MTCs no longer have
jurisdiction over guardianship proceedings pursuant
to B.P. Big. 129. However where the minor or
incompetent is a party to an action in the MTC, the
latter may appoint a guardian ad /item for him.

132

J9JC9B0M

RULE 93. APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIANS
Q.

Who may petition for the appointment of a
guardian over an incompetentor a minor?

A.

Any relative, friend, or other person on behalf of an
incompetent who has no parent or lawful guardian.
(81 R93).
In the case of a minor:
1) Any relative or other person on behalf of a minor.
2) The minor himself, if fourteen years of age or above.
3) Secretary of Social Welfare and Development and

by the Secretary of Health in the case of an insane
minor who needs to be hospitalized. (82 RGM).
When the minor resides outside the Philippines
but has property in the Philippines, any relative or
friend of such minor, or any one interested in his
property, in expectancy or otherwise, may petition
for the appointment of a guardian over the property.
(812 RGM).
Q.

Should the petition be verified?

A.

Yes. (82 R93).

Q.

What are the grounds for the appointment of a
guardian of a minor?

A.

The grounds for the appointment of a guardian over
the person or property, or both, of a minor are the
following: (BRP2)
(a) Death, continued absence, or incapacity of his
parents.

133

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b) Suspension, deprivation or termination of parental
authority.
(c)

Remarriage of his surviving parent, if the latter is
found unsuitable to exercise parental authority.

(d) When the best interests of the minor so requires.
(84 RGM).
Q.

Is the remarriage of a surviving parent, by itself,
a ground for the appointmentof a guardian over
the person or propertyof the minor children?

A.

No. The reason is that the surviving parent's
parental authority is not lost unless there is a
finding that he or she is unsuitable to exercise
parental authority. In such a case the court shall
appoint another person to be the guardian of the
person or property of the minor children. (S4[c]
RGM in relation to Article 212 of the Family Code).

Q.

What about remarriage of the parent in case of
nullificationor annulmentof the prior marriage?
Would that be a ground for the appointmentof a
guardian over the person or property of the
minor child?

A.

A reading of 84 RGM would indicate that the
parent's remarriage after the annulment or
nullification of his or her prior marriage is by itself not
a ground for the appointment of a guardian since 84
speaks only of remarriage of a surviving parent.
However the appointment of a guardian may still
be sought under the "best interests of the
minor" ground.15

15Dean
Melencio Sta. Maria believes that the remarried parent should
apply for legal guardianship over the minor child's property in line with the last
paragraph of Article 225 of the Family Code. MELENCIO STA. MARIA. COURT
PROCEDURES IN FAMILY LAW CASES 155-57 (1st ed . 2004).

134

J9JC9B0M

RULE 93
Appointment Of Guardians

Q.

Who may be appointed a guardian of an incompetent?

A.

In the appointmentof a guardianfor an incompetent,
the choice of a suitable guardian is left to the sound
discretion of the guardianship court. ( Goyena v.
Gusti/a, G.R. No. 147148, 13 January 2003). A nonresident should not be appointed as a guardian
becauseit would be difficult for him to fulfill his duties.
(Vansil v. Balmes, 358 SCRA 707 [2001]).
There is no rule of preference regarding the
appointment of a guardian over an incompetent.
Compare with the rule on the appointment of a
guardian over a minor under S6 RGM.

Q.

Who may be appointed guardian of the person
or property, or both, of a minor?

A.

In default of parentsor a court-appointedguardian,the
court may appoint a guardian of the person or
property, or both, of a minor, observing as far as
practicable,the followingorderof preference:(GB CO)
a) The surviving grandparent and in case several
grandparents survive, the court shall select
any of them taking into account all relevant
considerations.
b) The oldest brother or sister of the minor over 21,
unless fit or disqualified.
c)

The actual custodian of the minor over 21,
unless unfit or disqualified; and

d) Any other person, who in the sound discretion
of the court, would serve the best interests of
the minor.

135

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What should the verified petition contain?

A.

The verified petition should contain the following:
1) Jurisdictional facts.
2) The incompetency.
3) Names, ages, and residences of the incompetent's
relatives and the persons having him in their care.
4) Probable value and character of the incompetent's
estate.
5) The person for whom letters of guardianship are
prayed for. (S2 R93).
A petition for the appointment of a general
guardian of a minor must allege the following:
a) The jurisdictional facts.
b) The name, age and residence of the prospective
ward.
c) The ground rendering the appointment necessary
or convenient.
d) The death of the minor's parents or the
termination, deprivation or suspension of their
parental authority.
e) The remarriage of the minor's surviving parent.
f) The names, ages, and residences of relatives
within the 4th civil degree of the minor, and of
persons having him in their care and custody.
g) The probable value, character and location of
the property of the minor;

136

J9JC9B0M

RULE 93
Appointment Of Guardians

h) The name, age and residence of the person
for whom letters of guardianship are prayed.
(S7 RGM).
Q.

Will any defect in the petition or verificationrender
void the issuance of letters of guardianship?

A.

No. (S2 R93, S7 RGM).

Q.

After the petitionfor the appointmentof a general
guardian is filed, what shall the court do next?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for hearing the
same. Reasonable notice of the hearing of the
petition shall be given to the persons mentioned in
the petition including the incompetent himself. The
court may direct other general or special notice to be
given. (S3 R93). Where the person liable to be .put
under guardianship resides abroad but has estate in
the Philippines, the court may direct that notice be
given by publication or otherwise. (S6 R93).
The rule is substantially the same with respect to
guardianship over minor with the special requirement
that notice of the hearing shall be given the minor if
14 years of age or over. (S8 RGM).

Q.

Is a case study report required?

A.

No case study report is required in proceedings for
guardianship of incompetents. In the case of
guardianship over a minor, a case study report is
required. The court shall order a social worker to
conduct a case study report of the minor and all the
prospective guardians and submit his report and
recommendation to the court before the scheduled
hearing. (S9 RGM).

137

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the social worker intervene in the guardianship
case?

A.

Yes. The social worker may intervene on behalf of
the minor if he finds that the petition for
guardianship should be denied. (89 RGM).

Q.

May the petition be opposed or contested?

A.

Yes. Any interested person may, by filing a written
opposition, contest the petition on the ground of
majority of the alleged minor, _gompetency of the
alleged incompetent, or the ynsuitability of the person
for whom letters are prayed (MCU), and may pray
that the petition be dismissed, or that the letters of
guardianship issue to himself, or to any suitable
person named in the opposition. (84 R93, 810 RGM).

Q.

What happens at the hearing of the petition?

A.

At the hearing, the alleged incompetent must be
present if able to attend, and it must be shown that
the required notice has been given. The court shall
then hear the evidence of the parties and if the
person is proved to be incompetent or if the
grounds for the appointment of a guardian over a
minor are proved, the court shall appoint a suitable
guardian of his person or property, or both. In
guardianship over minors, the prospective ward
shall be presented to the court. (811 RGM). In
guardianship over the property of a non-resident
minor, the court may dispense with the presence of
the non-resident minor. (812 RGM).

138

J9JC9B0M

RULE 93
Appointment Of Guardians

Q.

What is the rule on service of final orders or
judgments?

A.

Final orders or judgments under R93 shall be
served on the civil registrar of the municipality
where the incompetent person resides or where his
property or part thereof is situated. (S8 R93).
In guardianship over minors, the final and
executory judgment or order shall be served upon
the Local Civil Registrar of the municipality or city
where the minor resides and the Register of Deeds
of the place where his property or part thereof is
situated shall annotate the same in the corresponding
title, and report his compliance to the court.
(S13 RGM).

139

J9JC9B0M

RULE 94. BONDS OF GUARDIANS
Q.

Is a bond required of guardians?

A.

Yes. Before a guardian enters upon the execution
of his trust or before letters of guardianship shall
issue, the guardian shall post a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties. (81 R94, 814 RGM).

Q.

Are parents who are the guardians of their
minor child required to furnish a bond?

A.

In the case of guardianship over the person of the
minor child, the parents are not required to furnish
a bond.
In the case of guardianship over the property
of the minor child, the parents are required to
furnish a bond if the market value of the property or
the annual income of the child exceeds P50,000.
The parent concerned shall furnish a bond in such
amount as the court may determine, but in no case
less than 10% of the value of such property or the
annual income, to guarantee the performance of
the obligations prescribed for general guardians.
(816 RGM; Art. 225, Family Code).
A verified petition for approval of the bond shall
be filed in the Family Court of the place where the
child resides or, if the child resides in a foreign
country, in the Family Court of the place where the
property or any part thereof shall be situated. The
petition shall be docketed as a summary judicial
proceeding. (Id.) Hence the judgment therein shall
be immediately final and executory. (Art. 247,
Family Code).
140

J9JC9B0M

RULE 95. SELLING AND ENCUMBERING
PROPERTY OF THE WARD
Q.

May a guardian sell or encumber property of the
incompetent?

A.

Yes provided that the guardian presents a verified
petition to the court by which he was appointed
praying for such an order and provided there
are valid grounds for the grant of such authority.
(81 R95). A mere motion will not suffice.

Q.

What is the effect if the guardian sells or
encumbers the ward's property without prior
court authority?

A.

The sale would be unenforceable. (Article 1403[1],
Civil Code).

Q.

What are the grounds for the grant of authority
to the guardian to sell or encumber the estate of
the ward?

A.

1) When the income of the estate under
guardianship is insufficient to maintain the ward
and his family; or
2) When it appears that it is for the benefit of the
ward that his real estate or some part thereof be
sold or mortgaged or otherwise encumbered,
and the proceeds thereof put out at interest, or
invested in some productive security, or in the
improvement of security of other real estate of
the ward. (81 R95).

141

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

It is not necessary for the grant of authority to
sell that the ward's income be insufficient to
maintain and educate him, it being enough that the
sale is for the ward's benefit. (Tavera v. El Hagar,
98 Phil. 481 ).
Q.

When the court authorizes the sale of the ward's
property, may this be done in a private sale?

A.

Yes, the property may be sold at a public or private
sale. (84 R95). However if the ward is a minor, the
sale of his or her property may be had only in a
public sale. (822 RGM).

142

J9JC9B0M

RULE 96. GENERAL POWERS AND
DUTIES OF GUARDIANS
Q.

In general, what is the authority of the guardian?

A.

In general, a guardian has full authority to take
possession of the property of the ward and to
perform all acts necessary for its management, and
to bring and defend such actions as may be
needed for this purpose. ( Caniza v. Court of
Appeals, 268 SCRA 640).

Q.

May a guardian pay the debts of the ward?

A.

Yes. Every guardian must pay the ward's just debts
out of his personal estate and the income of his real
estate. In case of insufficiency, the guardian may
pay out of the ward's real estate after obtaining a
court order for its sale or encumbrance. (S2 R96;
S17[a] RGM).

Q.

What proceedings should be taken when a
person
is suspected
of embezzling
or
 concealing the ward's property?

A.

Upon complaint of the guardian or ward, or of any
person having actual or prospective interest in the
ward's estate as creditor, heir, or otherwise, that
anyone is suspected of having embezzled,
concealed,or conveyed away any money, goods, or
interest belongingto the ward or his estate, the court
may cite the suspected person to appear for
examinationand make such orders as will secure the
estate against such embezzlement,concealment,or
conveyance. (S6 R96; S18[c] RGM).

143

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the guardianship court under 56 R96 and
51 S[c] of the RGM resolve the issue of title to
the property allegedly embezzled, concealed, or
conveyed?

A

No. While the guardianship court may issue an order
directing a person suspected of having embezzled,
concealed or disposed of a ward's property to appear
for examination regarding such property, it may not
resolve the issue of title to the property because such
an issue should be threshed out in a separate
ordinary action and not in a guardianship proceeding.
Exception would be in a case where the ward's title to
the property is clear and indisputable in which case
the guardianship court may issue an order directing
its delivery or return to the guardian. (Paciente v.
Dacuycuy, 114 SCRA 924).

144

J9JC9B0M

RULE 97. TERMINATION OF GUARDIANSHIP
Q.

When is the guardianshipterminated?

A.

If upon petition by the person declared incompetent, or
his guardian, relative, or friend, and after trial, it is
judicially determined that the person is no longer
incompetent, his competency shall be adjudged and the
guardianship shall cease. (S1 R97). The guardianship
may also be terminated when it appears that the
guardianship is no longer necessary. (S3 R97).
The court motu proprio or upon verified motion of
any person allowed to file a petition for guardianship
may terminate the guardianship on the ground that the
ward has come of age or has died. (S25 RGM).

Q.

Wanting to unclog his docket and coming
across the records of Special Proceedings No.
501, a guardianship case involving a minor with
properties worth more than a million pesos, and
findingthe said case to have been pending way
back in 1981, after petitioner had presented but
only 3 witnesses, followingthe appointment of
Dizon as guardian, Judge Jurado of Nueva Ecija
Regional Trial Court dismissed the case for
failure to prosecute. Discuss with reasons the
validityof said order of dismissal. (85 Bar Q18).

A

The order of dismissal was not valid. The provisions of S3
R17, which apply to actions, should not be unqualifiedly
applied to special proceedings,especially a guardianship
proceeding over a minor, wherein the court should
observe the "best interests of the minor'' standard.
The court should conduct a clarificatory hearing to
determine why the case had been pending for so long
and order the parties to proceed with dispatch.
145

J9JC9B0M

RULE 98. TRUSTEES
Q.

What is a trust?

A.

It is a fiduciary relationship concerning property
whereby confidence is reposed upon a person who
hold legal title over the property and deals with it for
the benefit of another.

Q.

Who is a trustee?

A.

The person in whom confidence is reposed as
regards property for the benefit of another person.
(Article 1440, Civil Code). R98 provides for the
procedure for the appointment of a trustee.

Q.

Distinguish a
trust from guardianship,
administration,or executorship.

A.

In a trust, the trustee or holder has legal title to the
property, while a guardian, administrator, or
executor does not. (4 EDGAR PARAS, CIVIL
CODE OF THE PHILIPPINES 739 [111h ed., 1985].

Q.

When is the appointmentof a trustee under R98
necessary?

A.

Such appointment is necessary if a testator has
omitted in his will to appoint a trustee in the
Philippines, and if such appointment is necessary
to carry into effect the provisions of the will. (S2
R98). In such a case, a petition for appointment of
a trustee shall be filed.

Q.

Which court appoints the trustee?

A.

The court in which the will was allowed, in the case
of a will allowed in the Philippines. If the will was
allowed in a foreign country, then the RTC of the
place in which the property, or some portion
146

J9JC9B0M

RULE 98
Trustees

thereof, affected by the trust is situated. (S1 R98).
Hence the petition for appointment of a trustee shall
be filed with the foregoing courts.
Q.

When land in the Philippines is held in trust for
Philippine residents by a trustee who had been
appointed abroad, is he still required to file a
petition in the Philippines?

A.

Yes. Such trustee shall file a petition in the RTC
having jurisdiction over the place where the land is
situated and after due notice to all persons
interested, shall be ordered to apply to the court for
appointment as a trustee. (84 R98). The reason is
that the foreign appointment does not extend to
lands here in the Philippines.

Q.

Is a trustee required to post a bond?

A.

Yes. Before entering on the duties of his trust, the
trustee shall file a bond with the court having
jurisdiction over the trust.

Q.

May a trustee
be exempted
requirement of posting a bond?

A.

Yes. The court may exempt a trustee appointed in
the will from posting a bond if the testator has
directed or requested such exemption. The court
may exempt any trustee (whether appointed in the
will or not) when all persons beneficially interested in
the trust, being of legal age, request such
exemption. (S5 R98). Compare with an executor
who may not be exempted from posting a bond even
if such exemption is directed in the will. (S2 R81 ).

147

from

the

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the conditionsincluded in the bond?

A.

The following conditions shall be deemed a part of
the bond whether written therein or not:
1) INVENTORY. The trustee shall submit to the
court an inventory of the personal and real
estate belonging to him as trustee which shall
have come to his possession or knowledge.
2) MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSITION. The trustee
shall manage and dispose of such estate and
faithfully discharge his trust in relation thereto.
3) ACCOUNT. The trustee shall render under oath
at least once a year until his trust is fulfilled an
account of the property in his hands and of the
management and disposition thereof.
4) SETTLEMENT OF ACCOUNTS. The trustee
shall settle his accounts and deliver the
remaining estate in his hands to those entitled
thereto. (86 R98).

Q.

Compare the accounts rendered by the trustees
to those rendered by administrators or executors.

A.

Accounts of trustees and guardians must be under
oath and shall be filed annually. Accounts of
administrators or executors are not required to be
under oath and, except for the initial and final
submission of their accounts, they shall be filed
only on such times as may be required by the court.

148

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION
Q.

What is adoption?

A.

Adoption is a juridical act which creates between two
persons a relationship similar to that which results
from legitimate paternity and filiation. (4 Valverde
473 cited in 1 ARTURO TOLENTINO, CIVIL CODE
OF THE PHILIPPINES649 [1985 ed.]).

Q.

What rule governs the procedure for adoption?

A.

The Supreme Court Rule on Adoption (ROA)
effective 22 August 2002. (A.M. No. 02-6-02-SC)
This rule covers both domestic adoption and intercountry adoption.

Q.

What is the jurisdictionand venue of an adoption
proceeding?

A.

The petition for adoption shall be filed with the
Family Court of the province or city where the
prospective adoptive parents reside. (S6 ROA).
The ROA however does not provide for the venue if
the prospective adoptive parents are non-residents.
It is submitted that in such a case, venue is laid with
the Family Court of the province or city where the
prospective adoptee resides since it may be said
that the res is located therein.

Q.

Remedios, claiming that she is the adopted
daughter of the deceased Toribio, filed with the
RTC an action for partition of Toribio'sestate.
Petitioner filed an answer alleging that
Remedios was not validly adopted as the
adoption decree issued by the then Court of
First Instance (CFI) was fraudulently secured.
The RTC dismissed the action for partition on
149

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the ground that Remedios was not validly
adopted. Did the RTC act properly in dismissing
the action on that ground?
A.

No. The RTC did not have the jurisdiction to
determine or to review the validity of the decree of
adoption issued by the erstwhile CFI by virtue of
the equal rank and category between the RTC and
the CFI. The proper court with jurisdiction to do so
was the CA, which has been vested by Section 9 of
Batas Pambansa Big. 129 16 with the exclusive
original jurisdiction over actions for the annulment
of the judgments of the RTC. (Oribello v. CA, 5
August 2015, Bersamin, J.)

Q.

Who may adopt?

A.
1) Any Filipino citizen of legal age, of good moral
character, has not been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude, and at least 16 years
older than the adoptee, and who is in a position
to support and care for his children in keeping
with the means of the family. The 16-yeardifference requirement may be waived when the
adopter is the biological parent of the adoptee
or is the spouse of the adoptee's parent.
2) Any alien possessing the same qualifications for
Filipinos, whose country has diplomatic relations
with the Philippines, who has been living in the
Philippines for at least 3 consecutive years prior to
the filing of the adoption petition and maintains
such residence until the entry of the adoption
decree, who has been certified by his diplomatic
or consular office or any appropriate government
agency to have the legal capacity to adopt in

150

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION

his country, and whose government allows
the adoptee to enter his country as his adopted
child. (CARD)
Q.

May the residency and certification requirements
for an alien be waived?

A.

Yes. The residency and certification requirements (for
an alien) may be waived for the following: (FMM)
a) a former Filipino who seeks to adopt a relative
within the 4th degree of consanguinity or affinity; or
b) MARRIED TO A FILIPINO: one who seeks to
adopt the legitimate child of his Filipino spouse; or
c) MARRIED TO A FILIPINO: one who is married
to a Filipino and seeks to adopt jointly with his
spouse a relative within the 4th degree of
consanguinity or affinity of the Filipino spouse.
The exceptions may be restated as follows: (FM)
(1) a former Filipino who seeks to adopt a relative
within the 4th degree; and
(2) one who is married to a Filipino, and the person
to be adopted is a relative of the Filipino within
the 4th degree. If the relative to be adopted is
other than a legitimate child of the Filipino, the
spouses must jointly adopt.

Q.

May a guardian adopt his ward?

A.

Yes, provided it is done after the termination of the
guardianship and clearance of his financial
accountabilities. (S4 ROA).

151

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is it required that spouses jointly adopt?

A.

Yes, the husband and wife shall jointly adopt. The
exceptions are (LIS):
1) If one spouse seeks to adopt the legitimate child
of the other spouse. This is not really an
exception since the other spouse obviously
cannot adopt his own legitimate child.
2) If one spouse seeks to adopt his own illegitimate
child, provided that the other spouse has given
his consent thereto. If one spouse seeks to
adopt the other's illegitimate child, both spouses
must jointly adopt.
3) If the spouses are legally separated from each
other. (S4 ROA).
(Note that the requirements are nationality
neutral unlike those for the residency and certification
requirements. Note that they only apply to a child
unless the spouses are legally separated).

Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
former Filipino citizen who has an illegitimate
child named Frances. Frances is staying with
Edna's mother in the Philippines. Ednawants to
adopt Francesand bring her to the UnitedStates.
a) Must Edna and Peter jointly adopt or may
Edna alone adopt Frances?
b) Are the requirements on residency and
certification applicable to the petition for
adoption of Frances?

152

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION

A.

a) Edna alone may adopt Frances provided Peter
has given his consent thereto. (See No. 2 in the
preceding answer). Peter and Edna may jointly
adopt Frances.
b) If Edna alone adopts Frances, the requirements
on residency and certification do not apply to
her, since Edna is a former Filipino who seeks
to adopt a relative within the 4th degree of
consanguinity or affinity. However if Peter and
Edna choose to jointly adopt Frances the
requirements of residency and certification
apply to Peter since Edna is a not a Filipino but
only a former Filipino.
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
Filipino citizen who has an illegitimate child
named Frances. Frances is staying with Edna's
mother in the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt
Frances and bring her to the United States.
a) Must Edna and Peter jointly adopt or may
Edna alone adopt Frances?
b) Are the requirements on residency and
certification applicable to the petition for
adoption of Frances?

A.

a) Edna alone may adopt Frances provided Peter
has given his consent thereto. Edna and Peter
may also jointly adopt Frances.
b) The residency and certification requirements are
not applicable to Edna who is a Filipino citizen.
They also do not apply to Peter if he chooses to
153

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

adopt jointly with Edna. This is because he is
adopting jointly with his Filipino spouse the
latter's relative within the 4th degree of
consanguinity or affinity.
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
former Filipino citizen who has a niece named
Frances. Francesis staying with Edna'smother
in the Philippines. Ednawants to adopt Frances
and bring her to the United States.
a) Must Edna and Peter jointly adopt or may
Ednaalone adopt Frances?
b) Are the requirements on residency and
certification applicable to the petition for
adoption of Frances?

A.
a) Edna and Peter must jointly adopt. This is
because Frances is not a child of Edna but only
a niece. The exceptions from joint adoption
apply only in cased of adoption of a child or in
case of legal separation. (LIS).
b) The requirements on residency and certification
do not apply to Edna, a former Fili~ino who
seeks to adopt a relative within the 4 h degree.
They however apply to Peter since he is not
married to a Filipino.
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
former Filipino citizen who has a niece named
Frances. Both Peter and Edna are residents of
the United States. Frances is staying with
Edna's mother in the Philippines. Edna wants
to adopt Frances and bring her to the United
States. Edna asks you for advice on whether
154

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION

she can file a petition for adoption of Frances.
What would be your advice?
A.

I would advice that she cannot file a petition for the
adoptionof Frances.While the residencyrequirements
do not apply to Edna, it should be noted that Edna
and Peter must jointly adopt since the relative to be
adopted by Edna is not the child either of Edna
or Peter. However since Peter is an alien, he
cannot adopt since he has not fulfilled the
residency requirement. Nor is Peter exempted from
the residency requirement since he is not married
to a Filipino.

Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
Filipino citizen who has a niece named Frances.
Both Peter and Edna are residents of the United
States. Frances is staying with Edna's mother in
the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States. Edna asks you for
advice on whether she can file a petition for
adoption of Frances. What would be your advice?

A.

I would advice that she can file a petition to adopt

Frances but both she and Peter must jointly adopt
Frances.This is not exemptedfrom the rule requiring
joint adoption since the relative to be adopted is
neitherEdna's or Peter's child. Nonetheless Peter is
exempted from the residency requirement since he
is married to a Filipino and seeks to adopt jointly
with her a relative of Edna within the 4th degree.
Q.

May the petition also pray for the change of
name of the adoptee?

A.

Yes. (S10 ROA).

155

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is the change of name limited only to the
adoptee's surname?

A.

No. There are no restrictions in this regard under S10
of the ROA. In fact S1 O(c) states that in case the
petition also prays for change of name, the title or
caption must contain the registered name of the child
and the full name by which the child is to be known.

Q.

If the petition and attachments are sufficient in
form and substance, what is the next step to be
done by the court?

A.

The court shall issue an order which shall contain the
registered name of the adoptee and the names by
which the adoptee has been known, the purpose of the
petition, and the complete name which the adoptee will
use if the petition is granted. The order shall also state
the date and place of the hearing and shall direct that a
copy thereof be published before the date of hearing at
least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the province or city
where the court is situated.

Q.

Is it required that a copy of the order of hearing be
furnished to the Office of the Solicitor General?

A.

No. The trial court however at its discretion order the
service of a copy of the order of hearing to the OSG
through the provincial or city prosecutor. (S12 ROA).

Q.

Rafael, a wealthy bachelor, filed a petition for the
adoption of Dolly, a one-year-old foundling who
had a severe heart ailment. During the pendency
of the adoption proceedings, Rafael died of
natural causes. The Office of the Solicitor
General files a motion to dismiss the petition on

156

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION

the ground that the case can no longer proceed
because of the petitioner'sdeath.
a) Should the case be dismissed? Explain.
b) Will your answer be the same if it was Dolly
who died during the pendency of the adoption
proceedings? Explain. (09 Bar Q13 Civil Law)
A.
a) No. Under S16 of the ROA, a decree of adoption
shall take effect as of the date the original petition
was filed even if the petitioner(s) die before its
issuance. Hence the death of the petitioner Rafael
will not result in the dismissal of the case.
b) No, my answer will not be the same. In such a
case the motion to dismiss should be granted.
The death of Dolly extinguishes her legal
personality or juridical capacity; thus she may
no longer be adopted. (Article 37, Civil Code).
Q.

May an adopter rescind the adoption?

A. Adoption, being in the best interests of the child, shall
not be subject to rescission by the adopter. However,
the adopter may disinherit the adoptee for causes
provided in Article 919 of the Civil Code. (S19 ROA).
Q.

May an adoptee rescind the adoption?

A.

Yes. Upon verified petition filed by the adoptee who
is over 18 years of age, or with the assistance of
the Department of Social Welfare and Development
if he is a minor, or by his guardian or counsel if over
18 but is incapacitated, the rescission may be
rescinded based on any of the following grounds
committed by the adopter:
157

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

1) Repeated physical and verbal maltreatment by the
adopter despite having undergone counseling;
2) Attempt on the life of the adoptee;
3) Sexual abuse or violence; or
4) Abandonment or failure to comply with parental
obligations. (819 ROA).
Q.

What is the jurisdiction and the venue of the
petition for rescissionof adoption?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Family Court of
the city or province where the adoptee resides.
(820 ROA).

Inter-countryAdoption
Q.

What is inter-countryadoption?

A.

It is the procedure whereby a foreigner or a Filipino
permanently residing abroad can adopt a Filipino
child who cannot be placed in a foster or an
adoptive family or cannot, in any suitable manner,
be cared for in the Philippines. (827 ROA).

Q. Where is the petitionfor intercountryadoption filed?
A.

With the Family Court where child resides or may
be found. The petition may be filed directly with the
Inter-Country Adoption Board (ICAB) in the country
of the prospective adopters. (828 ROA).

Q.

What is the duty of the court after the petition
has been filed?

A.

The court, after finding that the petition is sufficient

158

J9JC9B0M

ADOPTION

in form and substance and a proper case for intercountry adoption, shall immediately transmit the
petition to the ICAB for appropriate action. (S32 ROA).
Q.

What is the standard to be observed in intercountry adoption cases?

A.

The standard to be observed is the "best interest of
the minor" or "best interest of the child" standard.
This is shown by the declaration of policy of the
ICAA (S2) which provides that the State shall take
measures to ensure that inter-country adoptions
are allowed when the same shall prove beneficial to
the child's best interests, and shall protect his/her
fundamental rights. The Philippine contingent to the
September 2005 Hague convention stressed that
intercountry adoption was one that should operate
as a child-centered measure, and not with a focus
on the needs of the prospective adoptive parents.

Q.

Give the basic distinctions between domestic
adoption and inter-country adoption.

A.
ASTO

DOMESTIC
ADOPTION

INTERCOUNTRY
ADOPTION

Governing law

Domestic
Adoption Act of
1998 (DAA); SC
Rule on Adoption
(ROA)

Inter-Country
Adoption Act of
1995 (ICAA); ROA

Procedure

Judicial adoption

Extrajudicial
adoption

Coverage

Filipinos (w some
exceptions)
adopting other

Aliens or
Filipinos
permanently

159

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Filipinos

residing abroad
adopting
Filipinos

Who may
adopt

54ROA

Alien or Filipino
permanently
residing abroad
may file an
application for
i ntercou ntry
adoption

Who maybe
adopted

55ROA

Legally free child
(58 ICAA)

Where petition

FC where adopter
FC where child
resides. If
resides or may be
adopter nonfound/lCAB in the
resident, with FC
country of
where child
prospective
resides or may
adopters.
be found
If filed w FC and
finds petition to
be proper, it shall
transmit pet to
ICAB

Change of
name

May be included
in petition

160

Not included in
petition to adopt

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102. HABEAS CORPUS
Q.

What is the writ of habeas corpus?

A.

The writ of habeas corpus is the order of the court
requiring the person to whom it is issued to produce
the person alleged to be restrained of his liberty
or whose rightful custody has been withheld and
to justify such person's detention or custody.
(S1, 5 & 6 R102).
The remedy or special proceeding for obtaining
the writ is a petition for writ of habeas corpus.

Q.  What is a writ?
A.

Under the common law, a prerogative writ was a
form of command issued by the court in the name
of the King. Today these are a class of writs issued
by courts in furtherance of its discretionary powers
and are not granted as a matter of right. (STEVEN
H. GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 159 [1975]). Under
Philippine procedural law, the prerogative writs are
the (1) writ of habeas corpus (Rule 102, Rules of
Court), (2) writ of amparo (SC Rules on the Writ of
Amparo), (3) writ of habeas data (SC Rules on the
Writ of Habeas Data), (4) writ of continuing
mandamus (Rules of Procedure for Environmental
Cases), and (5) writ of kalikasan (id.).16

Q.

To what cases does the writ of habeas corpus
extend?

A.

The writ of habeas corpus shall extend to all cases
of illegal confinement or detention by which any

11'While
B.P. Big. 129 mentions writs of certiorari, prohibition, and
mandamus, the issuance of a writ is not provided for in R65 of the Rules of Court.

161

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

person is deprived of his liberty or by which the
rightful custody of any person is withheld from the
person entitled thereto. (S1 R102).
Q.

The President issued a proclamation suspending
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in
Mindanao because of widespread rebellion. Jose,
who was detained by the military on the claim
that he was a rebel, filed a petition for writ of
habeas corpus with the RTC of Zamboanga City.
The RTC dismissed forthwith the petition citing
the action taken by the President. Did the RTC
act correctly in dismissing forthwiththe petition?

A

No. It should be noted that Article VII, Section 18 of
the Constitution empowers the President to suspend
only the privilege of the writ not the writ itself.17
The writ is the order requiring the person to
whom it is issued to produce the body of the person
alleged to be restrained of his liberty and to justify
the detention. The writ issues as a matter of course
when it appears from the petition that the writ
ought to issue, the suspension of the privilege
notwithstanding. (SS R102). On the other hand, the
privilege of the writ is the further order inquiring into
the cause of detention and directing the release of
the person if he is illegally detained. (815 R102).
Only where the return of the respondent shows
that the person in custody is being held for an
offense covered by the suspension (i.e., rebellion or
offenses inherent in or directly connected with
invasion) and in a place where the suspension is
effective will the court dismiss the petition. In all
other cases, it must continue the proceedings to
17See

also Art. Ill, Section 15 of the Constitution.

162

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

determine the validity of the person's detention.
ISAGANI A. CRUZ, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
262-63 (1989 ed.), JOAQUIN G. BERNAS,
THE 1987 PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION: A
COMPREHENSIVEREVIEWER 146 (2011 ed.).
Here the RTC judge should have issued the
writ of habeas corpus directing the respondent
military to produce Jose before it and to file a
return. Only where the return of the military shows
that Jose is being detained for the crime of rebellion
should it dismiss the petition.
Q.

Which courts have jurisdiction over a petition
for writ of habeascorpus?

A. . There is concurrentjurisdiction among the Supreme
Court, Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan (in aid of
appellate jurisdiction), and the Regional Trial Court.
If filed with the RTC, the venue is with the RTC in
the judicial region where the writ is sought to be
enforced. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO 156-57 [91h
rev. ed., 3ra printing]). The Municipal Trial Court has
special jurisdiction in the absence of all the RTC
judges in the province or city. (835 B.P. Big. 129).
A verified petition for a writ of habeas corpus
involving custody of minors shall be filed with the
Family Court. However the petition may be filed
with the regular court in the absence of the
presiding judge of the Family Court, provided,
however, that the regular court shall refer the case
to the Family Court as soon as its presiding judge
returns to duty. The petition may also be filed with
the appropriate regular courts in places where there
are no Family Courts. The petition may likewise be
filed with the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, or
163

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

with any of its members. The writ may be made
returnable to a Family Court or to any regular court
within the region where the petitioner resides or
where the minor may be found for hearing and
decision on the merits. (820, Rule on Custody of
Minors and Writ of Habeas Corpus in Relation to
Custody of Minors).
The Family Courts Act of 1997 did not revoke
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the Court
of Appeals to issue writs of habeas corpus relating
to the custody of minors. (820 SC Rule on Custody
of Minors and Writ of Habeas Corpus in Relation
thereto; Thornton v. Thornton, 16 August 2004 ).
Q.

May a writ of habeas corpus issued by the
Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals be made
returnable before an RTC for hearing and
decision on the merits?

A.

Yes. (S2 R102).

Q.

A writ of habeas corpus was issued by the CA
but it made the same returnable before an RTC
for hearing and decision on the merits. From
the RTC decision, should the aggrieved party
appeal to the CA or to the SC?

A.

To the CA. Once the superior court makes the writ
returnable to a lower court as allowed by the Rules
of Court, the lower court designated does not
thereby become merely a recommendatory body,
whose findings and conclusions are devoid of
effect. The decision on the petition for habeas
corpus is a decision of the lower court, not of the
superior court. Hence the RTC's decision should
be appealed to the CA. (In re Datukan Malang
Saliba, 8 April 2015, Leanen, J.).

164

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Q.

May the Sandiganbayan grant petitions for the
issuance of a writ of habeas corpus in the exercise
of its original jurisdiction?(09 Bar Q11c ed)

A.

No, the Sandiganbayan has jurisdiction to issue the
writ of habeas corpus only in aid of its appellate
jurisdiction. (Sec. 4, PD No. 1606).

Q.

What
is the
territorial extent
of
enforceability of a writ of habeas corpus?

the

A. Writs issued by the Supreme Court, the Court of
Appeals, and the Sandiganbayanare enforceable
anywhere in the Philippines. Those issued by the
RTC and MTC are enforceableonly within the judicial
region to which they belong.(Sec. 3[a], InterimRules).
Q.

What is the form of the petition for writ of habeas
corpus and what are the contents thereof?

A.

Application for the writ shall be by a petition signed
and verified by the party for whose relief it is
intended or by some other person on his behalf,
and shall set forth: (PICO)
(a) The person subject of the application is
imprisoned or restrained of his liberty;
(b) The officer or name of the person by whom he
is imprisoned or restrained; or if both are
unknown or uncertain, such officer or person
may be described by an assumed name;
(c) The place where he is imprisonedor restrained,
if known; and
(d) A copy of the commitment or detention order
if it can be procured without impairing the
efficiency of the remedy; or if the imprisonment
165

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

or restraint is without any legal authority, such
fact shall be stated. (S3 R102).
Q.

May the petition be entertained by the court
even if it does not comply with 53 R102?

A.

Yes.
Strict compliance
with the technical
requirements for a habeas corpus petition as
provided in the Rules of Court may be dispensed
with where the allegations in the application are
sufficient to make out a case for habeas corpus.
Indeed, in the landmark case of Villavicencio v.
Lukban, 39 Phil. 778, the Supreme Court declared
that it is the duty of a court to issue the writ if there
is evidence that a person is unjustly restrained of
his liberty within its jurisdiction even if there is no
application therefor. A petition which is deficient in
form, such as a petition-letter, may be entertained
so long as its allegations sufficiently make out a
case for habeas corpus. (Fletcher v. Director of
BuCor, UDK-14071, 17 July 2009).

Q.

Who may file a petition for writ of habeas corpus?

A.

The party for whose relief it is intended or by some
person on his behalf. (S3 R102). In a habeas
corpus proceeding, any person may apply for the
writ on behalf of the aggrieved party. (Boac v.
Cadapan, 31 May 2011, Carpio Morales, J.).

Q.

Is the writ of habeas corpus available to one
who was released on bail?

A.

No, because actual physical restraint is required.
(Gonzales v. Viola, 61 Phil. 824 [1935]).

166

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Q.

When is the writ of habeas corpus not allowed?

A.

If it appears that the person to be restrained of his
liberty is in the custody of an officer under process
issued by a court or judge; or by virtue of a
judgment or order of a court of record, and that
court or judge had jurisdiction to issue the process,
render the judgment, or make the order, the writ
shall not be allowed. If the jurisdiction appears after
the writ is allowed, the person shall not be
discharged by reason of any informality or defect in
the process, judgment, or order. (S4 R 102).
While S4 R102 refers to restraint of a person
under process of a court of record, such process
may also be issued by a governmental agency
authorized to order a person's confinement, such
as the Bureau of Immigration.

Q.

May the writ of habeas corpus issue in favor of
military officers detained by virtue of court-martial
proceedings? May habeas corpus be availed of to
correct allegedly inhuman or cruel detention?

A.

No. The writ of habeas corpus will not issue where
the person alleged to be restrained of liberty is in the
custody of an officer under a process issued by a
court which has jurisdiction to do so. Since Major
Aquino stands charged in court martial proceedings
for alleged violations of Article 67 (attempting to begin
or create a mutiny) and Article 96 (conduct
unbecoming an officer and a gentleman), the legality
of his arrest is settled and the writ is unavailing.
Furthermore, the writ of habeas corpus is not the
proper mode to question conditions of confinement,
the writ will only lie if what is questioned is the fact or

167

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

duration of confinement. (Aquino v. Esperon, G.R.
No. 17 4994, 31 August 2007).
Q.

Together with his superior, Major General
Palparan,the petitioner Sgt. Osorio was charged
with kidnapping beforethe RTCof MalolosCity for
allegedly kidnapping U.P. students Karen Empeno
and Sherlyn Cadapan. The petitionerwas arrested
and detained at the Philippine Army Custodial
Center. Contending that he was being illegally
deprived of his liberty, petitionerfiled a Petitionfor
HabeasCorpus before the Court of Appeals. Sgt.
Osorio mainly argued that courts-martial, not a
civil court such as the Regional Trial Court, had
jurisdiction to try the criminal case considering
that he was a soldier on active duty and that
the offense charged was allegedly "serviceconnected." SSgt. Osorio added that he could not
be charged with the felony of kidnapping and
serious illegal detention becauseunder Article 267
of the RevisedPenalCode, the felony may only be
committed by a private individual, not a ranking
officer of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.Will
the writ of habeascorpus lie?

A.

No. A writ of habeas corpus may no longer be
issued if the person allegedly deprived of liberty is
restrained under a lawful process or order of the
court. The restraint then has become legal.
Therefore, the remedy of habeas corpus is
rendered moot and academic.
In availing himself of habeas corpus, Sgt.
Osorio mainly contends that the Regional Trial
Court that issued the warrants for his arrest had no
jurisdiction to take cognizance of the kidnapping
case against him. Sgt. Osorio's claim lacks merit.
168

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

The Regional Trial Court properly took
cognizance of the kidnapping case against him.
Republic Act No. 7055, Section 1 provides that if
the accused is a member of the Armed Forces of
the Philippines and the crime involved is one
punished under the Revised Penal Code, civil
courts shall have the authority to hear, try, and
decide the case.
Kidnapping is not part of the functions of a
soldier. Even if a public officer has the legal duty to
detain a person, the public officer must be able to
show the existence of legal grounds for the
detention. Without these legal grounds, the public
officer is deemed to have acted in a private
capacity and is considered a "private individual."
(Osorio v. Navera, 26 February 2018, Leanen, J.).
Q.

Datukan Malang Salibo learned that police
officers suspected him of being Butukan S.
Malang, one of the persons for whom an arrest
warrant had been issued for involvement in the
Maguindanao Massacre. Datukan presented
himself before the police officers in order to
clear his name but eventually he was arrested
and detained. May Datukan avail of a petition for
a writ of habeas corpus?

A.

Yes. Habeas corpus is the proper remedy for a
person deprived of liberty due to mistaken identity.
In such cases, the person is not held under any
lawful process and is continuously being illegally
detained. (In re Datukan Malang Saliba, 8 April
2015, Leanen, J.).

169

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Petitioner, the wife of P01 Sasser Ampatuan,
filed a petition for habeas corpus alleging the
illegal detention of her husband. P01 Ampatuan
was ordered by his superiors to go to Manila.
Upon his arrival in Manila,he was directed to go
to a press briefing where he was arrestedfor the
killing of 2 COMELECofficials. He was detained
at the Manila police station and an inquest was
conducted.The chief inquest prosecutorordered
the releaseof Ampatuanfor further investigation
but the police senior superintendent refused to
release him. The RTC issued the writ of habeas
corpus but subsequently dismissed the petition
upon the police's showing that Ampatuan
was placed under restrictive custody during
the pendency of a grave administrative case
against him. Should the petition for habeas
corpus be granted?

A.

No. The restrictive custody and monitoring of
movements or whereabouts of police officers under
investigation by their superiors is not a form of
illegal detention or restraint of liberty. This is
sanctioned by Sec. 52.4 of R.A. No. 8551 (New
DILG Act of 1990). Even assuming that there
initially was no administrative investigation when
placed in custody, the subsequent investigation
would legalize his restrictive custody. (Ampatuan v.
Macaraig, 29 June 2010).

Q.

May the writ of habeas corpus be availed of in
cases of detention by virtue of a judicial process
or valid judgment?

A.

Generally no since the detention is for legal cause.
In the following cases however the writ may be
availed of as a post-conviction remedy:

170

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

(a) There has been a deprivationof a constitutional
right resultingin the restraintof a person;
(b)

The court had no jurisdiction to impose the
sentence; or

(c) An excessive penalty has been imposed, as
such sentence is void as to such excess.
(Harden v. Director of Prisons, 81 Phil. 741; Go
v. Dimagiba, G.R. No. 151876, 21 June 2005).
Where a deprivation of a constitutional right is
established,the court that rendered the judgment is
ousted of jurisdiction and habeas corpus would lie
to challenge the legality of the detention. (Olaguer
v. Military Commission No. 34, G.R. Nos. 54558 &
69882, 22 May 1987). It is necessary however that
the judgment is no longer appealable, in which
case the writ is in the nature of a collateral attack
against a final but void judgment. (2 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
133-34 [6th rev. ed., a= printing], citing Santiago v.
Alikpala, L-25133, 28 September 1968).
Q.

In 1978, Pete was convicted by the then Court of
First Instance of Cavite on the sole basis of his
extrajudicial confession. The decision soon
became final and Pete has since been serving
sentence until now, although to this day, he
insists that he is innocent and that his
confessionwas coerced. He later learned of the
Supreme Court's decision in People v. Ga/it in
which the Court reversed a conviction that had
been based solely on an uncounselled
confession. He forthwith caused a petition for
habeas corpus to be filed, alleging that his
confinement has all along been illegal. The
171

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Government opposed the petition on the
ground that the decision of conviction had long
become final and may no longer be reopened
and that he is in fact serving sentence.
Will habeas corpus lie? Reasons. (88 Bar Q15)
A.

Yes habeas corpus will lie. The writ may be availed
of as a post-conviction remedy where has been a
deprivation of a constitutional right resulting in the
restraint of a person. (Harden v. Director of Prisons,
81 Phil. 7 41 ). Where a deprivation of a constitutional
right is established, the court that rendered the
judgment is deemed ousted of jurisdiction and
habeas corpus is the remedy to assail the legality of
the detention. (Olaguer v. Military Commission No.
34, G.R. Nos. 54558 & 69882, 22 May 1987).
Here since there was an uncounselled
confession, there was a violation of Pete's
constitutional right to counsel during custodial
investigation. Hence the writ of habeas corpus may
be availed of as a post-conviction remedy.

Q.

You have just been recently hired by the Public
Attorney's Office. Your boss comes into your
office bearing the file of Wawa Inocencio, who
is in jail serving sentence for illegal possession
of drugs. The file discloses that Wawa while
driving his beat-up car was stopped at a police
check-point, that the police opened his trunk
and found a large quantity of shabu, that during
the trial Wawa's lawyer failed to object to the
presentation of the seized shabu, and that the
RTC's judgment of conviction, based primarily
on the evidence of the seized shabu, was not
appealed and had become final and executory.
172

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Your boss says that he knows Wawa as an
upright law-abiding citizen. Your boss says that
things look grim for Wawa as the judgment of
conviction was already final and executory.
Your boss asks you what would be the best
legal step to be taken in regard to Wawa's case.
What would be your reply?
A.

I would reply that the best legal step to be taken is
to file a petition for writ of habeas corpus on ground
that Wawa's constitutional right against unlawful
search and against the use of illegally seized
evidence was violated. Where a deprivation of a
constitutional right is established, the court that
rendered the judgment is ousted of jurisdiction and
habeas corpus would lie to challenge the legality of
the detention. (0/aguer v. Military Commission No.
34, G.R. Nos. 54558 & 69882, 22 May 1987).

Q.

AX was charged before the YY Regional Trial
Court with theft of jewelry valued at P20,000,
punishable with imprisonment of up to 10 years
of prision mayor under the RevisedPenal Code.
After trial, he was convicted of the offense
charged, notwithstanding that the material facts
duly established during the trial showed that
the offense committed was estafa, punishable
by imprisonment of up to eight years of
prision mayor under the said Code. No appeal
having been taken therefrom, said judgment of
conviction becamefinal.
Is the judgment of conviction valid? Is the
said judgment reviewable thru a special civil
action for certiorari? Reason.(04 Bar Q5b).

173

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The judgment of conviction is not valid.
The Supreme Court has held that a judgment
of conviction is not valid if there was deprivation of
the constitutional right of the accused since the
court is ousted of jurisdiction. [0/aguer v. Military
Commission No. 34, G.R. Nos. 54558 & 69882, 22
May 1987]
Here AX's was deprived of his constitutional
right to be informed of the nature of the charge
against him when he was convicted of estafa
although the crime charged was theft.
The said judgment is not reviewable thru a
special civil action for certiorari.
Under the Rules of Court, certiorari is not a
remedy for a lost appeal. Here AX should have
appealed the judgment of conviction.
Moreover, the proper remedy for AX is a
petition for writ of habeas corpus. Where a
deprivation of a constitutional right is established,
the court that rendered the judgment is ousted of
jurisdiction and habeas corpus would lie to
challenge the legality of the detention. (0/aguer v.
Military Commission No. 34, G.R. Nos. 54558 &
69882, 22 May 1987).

Q.

In 1999, Dimagiba was convicted of the violation
of B.P. Big. 22 for issuing 13 bouncing checks
and sentenced by the MTC to 3 months'
imprisonment for each count and to pay
indemnify Go in the amount of P1 .3 million.
Dimagiba's appeals were denied and the
judgment of conviction became final in 2001. In
September 2001 Dimagiba was arrested to serve
174

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

his sentence. He filed in October 2001 with the
RTC a petition for habeas corpus invoking the
case of Vaca v. Court of Appeals (16 November
1998), and Administrative Circular No. 12-2000
which directs judges to give preferenceto the
penalty of fine rather than imprisonmentto firsttime offenders. He argues that he should be
released from detention under the principle of
retroactivity of favorable penal laws and that
his continued detention would violate his
constitutional right to the equal protection of
laws. The RTC granted his petition for habeas
corpus and ordered his releasefrom detention.
Was the grant of the petition correct?
A.

No, the grant of the petition was not correct.
Dimagiba's contention that the principle of
retroactivity of penal laws would benefit him is not
correct since Adm. Cir. 12-2000 is not a law which
deleted the penalty of imprisonment but a circular
which merely established a rule of preference,
subject to the judge's discretion, in imposing
penalties under B.P. Big. 22. The SC cannot delete
the penalty of imprisonment for that would in effect
be a law which only Congress may enact.
Nor would the plea of equal protection of laws
be appropriate. This is because SC A.C. No. 122000 as aforestated is not a law. Hence we apply
the general rule that habeas corpus is unavailing if
a person is under custody by virtue of legal process
or a valid judgment. (Go v. Dimagiba, G.R. No.
151876, 21 June 2005).

175

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q. After Alma had started serving her sentencefor
violation of Batas PambansaBig. 22, she filed a
petition of writ of habeas corpus, citing Vaca v.
Court of Appeals where the sentence of
imprisonment of a party found guilty of violation
of BP 22 was reduced to a fine equal to double
the amount of the check involved. She prayed
that her sentence be similarly modified and that
she be immediately releasedfrom detention. In
the alternative, she prayed that pending
determinationon whether the Vaca ruling applies
to her, she be allowed to post bail pursuant to
Rule 102,Sec. 14, which provides that if a person
is lawfully imprisoned or restrained on a charge
of having committed an offense not punishable
by death, he may be admitted to bail in the
discretion of the court. Accordingly, the trial
court allowed Alma to post bail and then ordered
her release. In your opinion, is the order of the
trial court correct? (08 Bar Q19).
(a) Under Rule 102?
(b) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure?
A.
(a) In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under Rule 102.
Alma's invocation of Vaca is misplaced since
Vaca did not delete the penalty of imprisonment but
merely established a rule of preference, subject to
the judge's discretion, in the imposition of penalties
under B.P. Big. 22. Hence the judgment convicting
Alma is valid. Under 84 R102, the writ of habeas
corpus shall not be allowed if a person is in custody
by virtue of a judgment or order of a court of record.

176

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

With more reason here where the judgment of
conviction is already final. (Go v. Dimagiba, G.R.
No. 151876. June 21, 2005).
Alma's invocation of 814 R102 is also
misplaced. A perusal of 814 R102 shows that it
applies only where there is no final conviction yet
as it speaks of the bail bond being "conditioned for
[the prisoner's] appearance before the court where
the offense is properly cognizable to abide by its
order or judgment."
(b) In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under the Rules of Criminal Procedure.
824 R114 provides that no bail shall be
allowed after a judgment of conviction has become
final and that in no case shall bail be allowed after
the accused has commenced to serve sentence.
Here Alma was already serving her sentence.
Hence bail cannot be allowed.
Q.

Lex Adonis, a newspaper reporter, was
convicted of libel by the RTC of Davao City in a
case filed against him by a congressman. He
was sentenced to imprisonment and began
serving his sentence in February 2007. In
January 2008, the SC issued Administrative
Circular No. 08-2008 on "Guidelines in the
Observance of a Rule of Preference in the
Imposition of Penalties in Libel Cases." Its
Section 2 provides thus:
2) The Judges concerned may, in the
exercise of sound discretion, and taking into
considerationthe peculiarcircumstancesof each
case, determinewhether the impositionof a fine
177

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

alone would best serve the interests of justice or
whether forbearing to impose imprisonment
would depreciatethe seriousnessof the offense,
work violenceon the social order, or otherwisebe
contrary to the imperativeof justice;
Adonis filed a Petition for Habeas Corpus
with the SC seeking the retroactive application
of the Circular. May the Petition be granted?
A.

No. The circular cannot be given retroactive effect
where the judgment in criminal case has already
become final and executory. (Adonis v. Tesoro, 5
June 2013, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Mariano was convicted by the Regional Trial
Court for raping Victoria and meted the penalty
of reclusion perpetua. While serving sentence
at the National Penitentiary, Mariano and
Victoria were married. Marianofiled a motion in
said court for his release from the penitentiary
on his claim that under Republic Act No. 8353,
his marriage to Victoria extinguished the
criminal action against him for rape, as well as
the penalty imposed on him. Howeverthe court
denied the motion on the ground that it had lost
jurisdiction over the case after its decision had
becomefinal and executory.
a) Is the ruling of the court correct? Explain.
b) What remedy/remediesshould the counsel
of Mariano take to secure his proper and
most expeditious release from the National
Penitentiary? Explain. (05 Bar Remedial
Law Q12).

178

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

A.
a) The ruling of the court is correct. Where the
judgment has become final and executory, the
same cannot be modified or set aside anymore. (S7
R120). The only remedy therefor is the writ of
habeas corpus. (Directo v. Director of Prisons, 56
Phil. 692; People v. Simon, G.R. No. 93028, 29
July 1994).
b) I would file a petition for habeas corpus as
a post-conviction remedy since the detention of
Mariano is without legal basis anymore. In this case
the writ is in the nature of a collateral attack against
a final and executory judgment. (Chavez v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. L-29169, 19 August 1968). The
petition for habeas corpus is an expeditious remedy
since in the calendaring of cases, preference is
given to habeas corpus cases (S1 R20) and under
S12 R102 the court before whom the writ is
returned or adjourned must immediately proceed to
hear and examine the return.
Q.

Is the remedy of habeas corpus available in the
case of forcible taking and disappearance
of a person?

A.

No. If what is alleged is forcible taking and
disappearance, not arrest and detention, the proper
remedy is not habeas corpus but criminal
investigation and proceeding. Here the respondents
denied having custody of the missing person and
there was no adequate proof that respondents had
such custody. (Martinez v. Mendoza, G.R. 153795,
17 August 2006). Take note however that effective
27 October 2007, the writ of amparo is available in
cases of enforced disappearance.
179

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the remedy of a convict if the results
of the post-convictionDNA testing are favorable
to him?

A.

The convict may file a petition for a writ of habeas
corpus in the court of origin if the results of the
post-conviction DNA testing are favorable to the
convict. If the court, after due hearing finds the
petition to be meritorious, it shall reverse or modify
the judgment of conviction and order the release of
the convict. A similar petition may be filed either in
the CA or in the SC, or with any member of said
courts, which may conduct a hearing thereon or
remand the petition to the court of origin and issue
appropriate orders. (S10 Rule on DNA Evidence).
Take note that such petition for habeas corpus may
be filed by even the prosecution. (Id.).

Q.

What is a preliminary citation and how is it
distinguishedfrom a peremptory writ?

A.

Where the person is detained under governmental
authority and the illegality of his detention is not
patent from the petition for the writ, the court may
issue a preliminary citation to the government
officer having custody to show cause why the writ
should not issue. When the cause of the detention
appears to be patently illegal, the court may issue a
peremptory
writ requiring the
unconditional
production before the court of the body of the
person detained at the date and time specified.
(Lee Yick Hon v. Insular Collector of Customs, 41
Phil. 548, 30 March 21 ).

180

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Withholdingof rightful custody
Q.

Give examples where the writ of habeas corpus
is available where the rightful custody of
any person is withheld from the person entitled
thereto.

A.
1) Parents may avail of the writ to obtain custody of
their child as against the grandparent.
2) Wife may avail of the writ to obtain custody of
her child under seven years of age as against
her husband. (See Article 213, Family Code).
3) A judicial guardian who was unduly deprived of
custody of her ward is entitled to a writ of habeas
corpus in order to regain custody. (Hernandez v.
San Juan-Santos, 7 August 2009).
Q.

Where the parents have joint custody of the
child, may one of them avail of the writ of
habeas corpus as against the other?

A.

Yes. Where both parents have joint custody of a
child, the writ may be availed of if a father is
deprived of his right to see his child. (Salientes v.
Abanilla, G.R. 162734, 29 August 2006).

Q.

Is the writ of habeas corpus available to compel
a husband to live with his wife?

A.

No. This is a matter beyond judicial authority and is
best left to the man and woman's free choice.
(llusorio v. Bildner, 332 SCRA 169).

181

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What law governs the writ of habeas corpus in
relation to custody of minors?

A

The governing law is the Supreme Court Rule on
Custody of Minors and Writ of Habeas Corpus in
Relation to Custody of Minors effective 15 May 2003.

Q.

Husband H files a petition for declaration of
nullity of marriage before the RTC of Pasig City.
Wife W files a petition for habeas corpus before
the RTC of Pasay City, praying for the custody
over their minor child.
a) H files a motion to dismiss the wife's petition
on the ground of the pendency of the case.
Rule. (07 Bar Q4).
b) What if W had filed the petition for habeas
corpus ahead of H's petition for declaration
of nullity of marriage? Would your ruling
be the same?

A
a) The motion to dismiss should be granted.
The filing of a petition for declaration of nullity
of marriage automatically includes the resolution of
the issue of rightful custody pursuant to Articles 49
and 50 of the Family Code. Hence since the same
subject matter and parties are involved, then lis
pendens is present.
b) My ruling would be the same. The petition filed
by petitioner for the declaration of nullity of
marriage before the Pasig RTC is the more
appropriate action to determine the issue of who
between the parties should have custody over
the minor child in view of the express provision
182

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

of the second paragraph of Article 50 of the
Family Code. This must be so in line with the
policy of avoiding multiplicity of suits. (Yu v. Yu,
G.R. No. 164915, 10 March 2006).
Q.

The Spouses Gallardo are the parents of
Maricel. Maricel bore a child out of wedlock and
then ran away from home. She lived with Noel
Bagtas and Lydia Sioson. Afterwards Maricel
left Bagtas and Sioson but she left with them
the custody of her child Maryl Joy after
executing a document relinquishing to Bagtas
and Sioson her rights over the child.
The Gallardostried unsuccessfullyto obtain
from Bagtas and Sioson the custody of their
granddaughter Maryl Joy. The Gallardos then
filed with the RTC a petition for habeas corpus.
After the court had issued the writ of habeas
corpus, MarylJoy was producedbeforethe court.
Pursuant to a compromise agreement wherein
the Gallardoswould have custody of the child on
Fridays,Saturdays,and Sundaysand Bagtas and
Sioson on the other days, the Gallardoswere able
to obtain custody of Maryl Joy.
Later Bagtas and Sioson learned that the
Gallardos had brought the child to Samar. After
various incidents and motions between the
parties, the RTC issued an order dismissing the
habeascorpus case for having becomemoot and
academic since Maryl Joy had already been
produced and custody over her delivered to the
Gallardos. Bagtas and Sioson moved for the
reconsiderationof the order but the motion was
denied.Was the RTC's order dismissing the case
for having becomemoot and academicproper?
183

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. A habeas corpus case involving a minor is not
limited to the production of the minor before the
court. The main purpose of the proceeding is to
determine who has rightful custody over the child.
The court should still proceed to determine who
should have the rightful custody of the child. (Bagtas
v. Santos, G.R. No. 166682,27 November2009).

Q.

Queenie was born on 3 May 2012 to Renalyn and
Ricky James, who had been living together with
Renalyn's parents without the benefit of
marriage. Three years later, or in April 2015, the
relationship ended. Renalyn went to Manila,
supposedly leaving Queenie behind in the care
and custody of her father, Ricky James. Ricky
James alleged that on November 2015, Spouses
Renata and Marlyn Masbate (Renalyn's parents)
took Queenie from the school where he had
enrolled her. When asked to give Queenie back,
Renalyn's parents refused and instead showed a
copy of a Special Power of Attorney executed by
Renalyn granting full parental rights, authority,
and custody over Queenie to them. Consequently
Ricky James filed a petition for habeas corpus
and custody before the RTC. A hearing was
conducted in December 2015 where Renalyn
brought Queenie and expressed the desire for
her daughter to remain in her custody.
The RTC in a summary hearing ordered that
the custody of three-year-old Queenie rightfully
belongs to Renalyn, citing the second paragraph
of Article 213 of the Family Code, which states that
"[n]o child under seven [(7)] years of age shall be
separated from the mother." In the fa/lo of said
Order, the RTC declared that it will "NOT GIVE
FURTHERDUE COURSE" to the petition a quo.

184

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

On appeal the CA set aside the RTC order
and remanded the case to the RTC for trial on
the issue of who has rightful custody over
Queenie. The CA however granted "temporary
custody rights"to Ricky James that will allow
him to take Queenie out once a month for a
period not exceeding 24 hours.
a) Was the CA order remanding the case to the
RTC for trial correct?
b) Was the CA's order granting temporary
custody rights to Ricky James proper?
A.
a) No. In habeas corpus case involving rightful
custody of a child, the court must conduct a trial
of who has rightful custody. The court cannot
simply rely on Article 213 of the Family Code to
summarily grant custody to the mother without a
full-blown trial since the provision contains an
exceptive clause: "unless the court finds
compelling reasons to order otherwise." Also
while Article 176 of the Family Code provides
that "illegitimate children shall be under the
parental authority of their mother," case law
provides that a court may order otherwise for
imperative reasons.
b) No. It should be stressed that Section 15 of A.M.
No. 03-04-04-SCprovidesfor temporaryvisitation
rights, not temporary custody, as follows:
"Section 15. Temporary visitation rights. - The
court shall provide in its order awarding
provisional custody appropriate visitation rights
to the non-custodial parent or parents, unless
185

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the court finds said parent or parents unfit or
disqualified." (Masbate v. Relucio, 30 July 2018,
Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q. CD filed a petition for habeascorpus before the
RegionalTrial Court of CaloocanCity seeking to
compel TM to produce before the court CD's
biological daughter and to return custody over
the child to CD. CD resides in Manilawhile TM
and the child reside in Quezon City. The RTC
issued the writ of habeas corpus and the writ
was served upon TM while she was attending a
preliminary investigation in Quezon City. By
way of special appearance,TM moved for the
quashal of the writ and the dismissal of the
habeas corpus case. Arguing that the RTCCaloocan lacked jurisdiction over the case, TM
relies on Section 3 of A.M. No. 03-04-04-SCand
maintains that the habeas corpus petition
should have been filed before the family court
that has jurisdiction over CD's place of
residence or wherever the minor may be found.
TM argues also that the RTC did not acquire
jurisdiction over her person as she was not
served with summons. Rule on TM's motion to
quash writ and to dismiss case.
A.

Motion to quash writ and to dismiss case denied.
The petition for habeas corpus was properly
filed in the RTC of Caloocan. Section 3 of A.M. No.
03-04-04-SC, which states that "the petition for
custody of minors shall be filed with the Family Court
of the province or city where the petitioner resided or
where the minor may be found," is not applicable as
it refers to a petition for custody of minors. What is
applicable is Section 20 which covers petition for a

186

J9JC9B0M

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

writ of habeas corpus involving custody of minors.
Consideringthat the writ is made enforceablewithin
a judicial region, petitions for the issuanceof the writ
of habeas corpus, whether they be filed under R102
of the Rules of Court or pursuant to Section 20 of
A.M. No. 03-04-04-SC,may be filed with any of the
proper RTCs within the judicial region where
enforcementthereof is sought.18
As regards TM's assertion that the summons
was improperly served, service of summons is not
required in a habeas corpus petition, be it under
R102 or A.M. No. 03-04-04-SC. A writ of habeas
corpus plays a role somewhat comparable to a
summons, in ordinary civil actions, in that, by
service of said writ, the court acquires jurisdiction
over the person of the respondent. (See TujanMilitante v. Cada-Deapera, 28 July 2014).
Q.

What is the period of appeal from a judgment or
final order in a habeas corpus case?

A.

An appeal in habeas corpus cases shall be taken
within 48 hours from notice of the judgment or final
order appealed from. (Sec. 39, B.P. Big. 129; 83
R41 as amended by A.M. No. 01-1-03-SC, effective
15 July 2001).19 Only a notice of appeal is required

18This
statement in Tujan-Militante needs clarification.
Petitions for
habeas corpus in relation to child-custody under Section 20 of A.M. No. 03-0404-SC as a rule may be filed only with the Family Court, not just any RTC, within
the judicial region.
19Under
S18 R41 of the 1964 Rules, the appeal period was 48 hours from
notice of the judgment. In Tung Chin Hui v. Rodriguez, G.R. 137571, 21
September 2000, the Supreme Court held that under S3 R41 of the 1997 Rules
which took effect on 1 July 1997, the appeal period for habeas corpus was 15
days from notice since S18 R41 of the 1964 Rules was not reproduced in the
1997 Rules. Tung Chin Hui was superseded by A.M. No. 01-1-03-SC (effective
15 July 2001 ), which reverted to the 48-hour appeal period. The ruling in Tung
Chin Hui is arguable since under Sec. 39 of B.P. Big. 129, the appeal period is

187

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

to perfect the appeal. (1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 303 [4th rev. ed.,
2nd printing]).
Q.

In a habeas corpus case, the respondent
Director of the Bureauof Corrections receiveda
copy of the RTC's decision on October 1 at
10:00 am. Up to when may the Director appeal
the decision?

A.

Up to 3 October, even if beyond 10:00 am. Under
S1 R22, in computing any period of time prescribed
or allowed by the Rules of Court or by order of
court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the
act or event from which the designated period of
time begins to run is to be excluded and the date of
performance included. Hence the 48-hour period
starts to run on 2 October. (See Kabigting v.
Director of Prisons, G.R. No. L-15548, 30 October
1962; 1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 303 [4th rev. ed., 2nd printing]).

48 hours. The 48-hour appeal period applies also to judgments of the Court of
Appeals and Sandiganbayan pursuant to Sec. 39 of B.P. Big. 129.
188

J9JC9B0M

RULE ON THE WRIT OF AMPARO
(eff. 24 October 2007)
Q.

What is the writ of amparo?

A.

A remedy available to any person whose right to
life, liberty, and security has been violated or is
threatened with violation by a public official or
employee or a private individual or entity. The writ
coversextralegalkillingsand enforceddisappearances
or threats thereof. (81, Rule on the Writ of Amparo
[RWA]). The Supreme Court has held that the writ
is confined to cases of extralegal killings and
enforced disappearances or threats thereof. Hence
the writ cannotbe availed of by an alien detainedby the
Bureau of Immigration by virtue of legal process.
(Mison v. Gallegos, 23 June 2015, e.b., Perez, J.)

Q.

Conrad is widely known in the neighborhoodas a
drug addict. He is also suspected of being a
member of the notorious "Akyat-Condo Gang"
that has previously broken into and looted
condominium units in the area. Retired Army
Colonel Sangre - who is known as an antiterrorism fighter who disdained human and
constitutional rights and has been nicknamed
"terror of Mindanao"- is now the Headof Security
of Capricorn Land Corporation, the owner and
developerof SagittariusEstateswhere a series of
robberieshas recentlytaken place.
On March 1, 2013, Conrad informed his
mother, Vannie, that uniformed security guards
had invited him for a talk in their office but he
refusedto come. Later that day, however,Conrad
appearedto have relented; he was seen walking
189 .

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

into the security office flanked by two security
guards. Nobody saw him leave the office
afterwards. Conrad did not go home that night
and was never seen again. The following week
and after a week-long search, Vannie feared the
worst because of Col. Sangre's reputation. She
thus reported Conrad's disappearance to the
police. When nothing concrete resulted from the
police investigation, Vannie - at the advice of
counsel - filed a petition for a writ of amparo to
compel Col. Sangre and the Sagittarius Security
Office to produce Conrad and to hold them liable
and responsible for Conrad's disappearance. Did
Vannie's counsel give the correct legal advice?
(13 Poli Bar Q9).

A.

No, Vannie's counsel did not give the correct legal
advice.
The Supreme Court has held that in an amparo
petition, proof of disappearance alone is not enough.
It must also be shown and proved by substantial
evidence that the government or its agents had a
hand in the disappearance or that they failed to
exercise extraordinary diligence in investigating his
case. Even if the person sought to be held
accountable or responsible in an amparo petition is
a private individual or entity, still, government
involvement in the disappearance remains an
indispensable element. Otherwise the writ of
amparo may not issue.
Here the facts show that it was a private security
agency which was involved and there was no showing
of any direct or indirect government involvement. The
mere fact that nothing concrete came out of the police
investigation after a week is not proof that the police

190

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

failed to exerciseextraordinarydiligencein investigating
the case. (Navia v. Pardico, 19 June 2012, e.b., Del
Castillo, J.).
Q.

Petitioners were complaining to a Cebu Pacific
desk at the airport regarding their lost baggage
when they noticed Ramon Tulfo taking a video
of them. PetitionersapproachedRamonTulfo and
a brawl subsequently ensued in which the
Petitioners got the better of Ramon Tulfo. Days
after the incident, respondents Raffy, Ben, and
Erwin Tulfo, brothers of Mon, aired on their TV
program comments and expletives against
Petitionersand threatenedthat they will retaliate.
Terrified by the gravity of the threats hurled,
Petitionersfiled a petitionfor the issuanceof a writ
of amparo against Respondentsbefore the RTC.
Respondentsfiled a motion to dismiss arguing
that their statements did not involve any actual
threat and that they were merely expressingtheir
strong sentiments to defend their brother.
Petitioners opposed the motion saying that a
motion to dismiss is a prohibitedmotion. Maythe
RTCgrant the motionto dismiss?

A.

Yes. The Rule on the Writ of Amparo was intended
to address and, thus, is presently confined to
cases involving extralegal killings and/or enforced
disappearances, or threats thereof. Moreover there
must be a showing of direct or indirect government
participation in order for the Rule to apply.
In this case, it is undisputed that petitioners'
amparo petition before the RTC does not involve
any case of extrajudicial killing and/or enforced
disappearance, or any threats thereof, in the
senses above-described. Their petition is merely
191

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

anchored on a broad invocation of respondents'
purported violation of their right to life and security,
carried out by private individuals without any
showing of direct or indirect government
participation. Thus, it is apparent that their amparo
petition falls outside the purview of A.M. No. 07-9-

12-SC and, perforce, must fail.
Hence, the RTC, properly exercised its
discretion to motu proprio dismiss the same under
this principal determination, regardless of the filing
of a motion to dismiss. The court, indeed, has the
discretion to determine whether or not it has the
authority to grant the relief in the first place. And
when it is already apparent that the petition falls
beyond the purview of the rule, it has the duty to
dismiss the petition so as not to prejudice any of
the parties through prolonged but futile litigation.
( Santiago v. Tulfo, 21 October 2015, PerlasBernabe, J.).
Q.

Is the writ of amparo available if there is a
threatened demolition of a dwelling by virtue of
a final and executory judgment?

A.

No. Enjoiningthe threateneddemolitionof a dwelling
by virtue of a final and executory judgment is not
included among the enumeration of rights in S 1
RWA. ( Canlas v. Napico Homeowners Association,
5 June 2008, en bane).

Q.

Is a writ of amparo available against a barangay
captain's alleged trespass of private property?

A.

No, since this is merely a violation of Petitioner's
property rights. (Sps. Pador v. Arcayan, 12
March 2013).
192

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

Q.

Is a writ of amparo available to an attorney
whose name was included by the Philippine
Army in its Order of Battle list?

A.

No. The inclusion of petitioner's names in the Order
of Battle List does not, by itself, constitute an actual
threat to her right to life, liberty and security as to
warrant the issuance of a writ of amparo. (Ladaga
v. Mapagu, 13 November 2012, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

Q.

Where may the petition for a writ of amparo
be filed?

A.

It may be filed with the RTC of the place where the
threat, act or omission was committed or any of its
elements occurred, or the Sandiganbayan, Court of
Appeals, Supreme Court or any justice thereof.20

Q.

Who may file a petition for issuance of writ of
amparo?

A.

The petition may be filed by the aggrieved party or
by any qualified person or entity in the following
order: (IRC)
(1) Immediate family of aggrieved party: spouse,
children and parents.
(2)

Ascendant, descendant, or relative within 4th
degree, in default of 1.

(3) Concerned citizen or organization if no known
immediate family member or relative of the
aggrieved party. (S2 RWA).

20Note

that the rules provide where the petition for a writ of amparo is filed,
not which court has jurisdiction over a petition for writ of amparo. The reason is
that the Supreme Court has no power to lay down rules regarding subject-matter
jurisdiction.

193

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the territorial extent of the writ of
amparo's enforceability?

A.

It may be enforced anywhere in the Philippines.

Q.

What are the contents of the petition?

A.

The petition shall be signed and verified and shall
allege the following:
a) Personal circumstances of the petitioner.
b) Personal circumstances of the respondent.
c) The right to life, liberty, and security of the
aggrieved party violated or threatened with
violation by the respondent and how such threat
or violation is committed with the attendant
circumstances detailed in supporting affidavits.
d) The investigation conducted, if any, specifying
the names, personal circumstances, and
addresses of the investigating authority or
individuals, as well as the manner and conduct
of the investigation, together with any report.
e) The actions and recourses taken by the petitioner
to determine the fate or whereabouts of the
aggrieved party and the identity of the person
responsible for the threat, act, or omission.
f) The relief prayed for.

Q.

May the President be included as a respondent
in a writ of amparo case solely on the basis of
command responsibility?

A.

No because of the principle of presidential immunity
from suit. (Rubrico v. Macapagal-Arroyo, G.R. No.

194

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

183871, 18 February 201 O; Burgos v. MacapagalArroyo, 22 June 2010).
Q.

In a writ of amparo case, the AFP Chief of Staff
and the PNP Director were included as
respondents not because they were connected
with, let alone behind the abduction and
harassmentof the petitioner, but on the theory
that as commanders,they were responsible for
the unlawful acts of their subordinates.May the
AFP Chief of Staff and the PNP director be
includedas respondentsin a writ of amparocase
solely on the basis of commandresponsibility?

A.

Yes but not for the purpose of attaching
accountability and responsibility to them for the
enforced disappearance of Lourdes but only to
determine the author who, at the first instance, is
accountable for and has the duty to address the
disappearance and harassments complained of in
order to enable the court to devise remedial
measures. (Rubrico v. Macapagal-Arroyo, G.R. No.
183871, 18 February 2010).

Q.

Should the respondent file a return? If so,
within what period?

A.

The respondent shall file a verified return within 5
working days after service of the writ. The period to
file a return cannot be extended except on highly
meritorious grounds.

Q.

What are the contents of the return?

A.

The return together with supporting affidavits shall,
among other things, contain the following: (PAID)

195

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(a) Lawful defenses.
(b) Action taken to determine the fate or
whereabouts of the aggrieved party and to
determine the responsible persons.
(c) All relevant information in respondent's possession
about the threat, act, or omission.
(d) If the respondent is a public official or
employee, the return shall further state the
actions that have been taken or will be taken:
(i) to verify the identity of the aggrieved party;
(ii) to recover and preserve evidence
(iii) to identify witnesses and obtain their statements.
(iv) to determine the cause and circumstances of
the death or disappearance.
(v) to identify and arrest responsible persons.
(vi) to hale suspected offenders before court.
A general denial of the allegations of the
petition shall not be allowed.
Q.

In a writ of amparo case, the RTC judge ordered
the respondents to file an answer rather than a
return. Did the judge act with grave abuse of
discretion?

A.

Yes. A return in a writ of amparo case is different
from and serves a different function from an
answer. Aside from defences, a return must also
allege other information or matters. (De Lima v.
Gatdula, 19 February 2013).

196

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

Q.

What are the effects of the failure to file the return?

A.

The effects of the failure to file the return are the
following:
(1)

The respondent waives any defense that he
may have had. Under S10 RWA, all defenses
shall be raised in the return; otherwise they
shall be deemed waived.

(2) The court shall proceed to hear the petition ex
parte. (S12 RWA).
(3) The court may cite for contempt a respondent
who refuses to make a return. (S16 RWA).
Q.

What are the interim reliefs available in a writ of
amparo case?

A.

Upon the filing of the petition or at anytime before
final judgment, the court may grant any of the
following reliefs: (PWIT)
(a)

TEMPORARY PROTECTION ORDER (TPO).
Upon motion or motu proprio, the court may order
that the aggrieved party and any member of the
immediate family be protected in a government
agency or by an accredited person or private
institution capable of securing their safety.

(b)

INSPECTION ORDER (10). Upon verified motion
and after due hearing, the court may order the
inspection or photographing of property or
relevant object or operation thereon. If the
motion is opposed on the ground of national
security or evidentiary privilege, the court may
conduct an in camera hearing.

197

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

(c)

PRODUCTION ORDER (PO). Upon verified
motion and after due hearing, the court may
order production of designated objects for
inspection or copying. If the motion is opposed
on the ground of national security or
evidentiary privilege, the court may conduct an
in camera hearing.

(d)

WITNESS PROTECTION ORDER (WPO).
Upon motion or motu proprio, the court may
refer witnesses to the DOJ for admission to the
witness protection program. Witnesses may
also be referred to other government agencies
or accredited persons or private institutions
for safekeeping.

Cleofas and Marciana filed with the Supreme
Court a petition for the issuance of a writ of
amparo with motion for production and
inspection against the respondent chief of staff
and military officers of the Northern Luzon
Command (NOLCOM).Petitioners alleged that the
military was behind the disappearance of their
sons Nicolas and Heherson. They presented an
affidavit of Josephine who alleged therein that
she saw Nicolas and Heherson inside Camp
Servillano Aquino of the NOLCOM in Tarlac City.
The SC resolved to issue a writ of amparo and
directed the respondents to make their return
before CA Justice Edgardo Sundiam. In their
return, the respondents denied having custody of
Nicolas and Heherson or having any knowledge
as to their whereabouts. After hearing, the Court
of Appeals issued an order stating that
petitioners were not able to establish that
respondents were directly or indirectly connected
with the disappearance of Nicolas and Heherson.
198

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

The Court of Appealsstated that the respondents'
witnesses were able to impeachthe testimony of
Josephine by showing that she had a penchant
for lying. Nonethelessthe Court of Appealsin the
interest of human rights and justice, granted
reliefs to the petitioners in the form of inspection
of Camp S. Aquino and ordering concernedunits
of the NOLCOMto make thorough investigation
as to the disappearance. Was it proper for the
Court of Appealsto grant the reliefs of inspection
and investigation?
A.

No. While the RWA provides for the interim reliefs
of TPO, 10 and PO, these provisional reliefs are
intended to assist the court before it arrives at a
judicious determination of the amparo petition. For
the appellate court, in the present case, to still
order the inspection of the military camps and order
the army units to conduct an investigation into the
disappearance of Nicolas and Heherson after it
absolved petitioners is not in order. The reliefs
granted by the appellate court to respondents are
not in sync with a finding that petitioners could not
be held accountable for the disappearance of the
victims. (Yano v. Sanchez, G.R. No. 186640, 11
February 2010 [e.b.]).

Q.

Petitioner filed a petition for issuance of writ of
amparo against the respondent military officers.
He alleges that the military was coercing or
intimidating him to be a double agent for the
military against the NPA. The CA issued a
judgment granting the privilege of the writ of
amparo. In his motion for reconsideration,the
Petitioner asks that the court issue a temporary
restraining order (TPO)to stop the military from
coming nearhim. Is the issuanceof a TPOproper?
199

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. Interim reliefs can only be granted before a final
adjudication of the case is made. In any case,
it must be underscoredthat the privilege of the writ
of amparo, once granted, necessarily entails the
protection of the aggrieved party. Thus, since
petitioner was granted the privilege of the writ
of amparo, there is no need to issue a TPO
independently of the former. The order restricting
respondents from going near Rodriguez is
subsumed under the privilege of the writ. (Rodriguez
v. Macapagal-Arroyo, 15 November 2011, e.b.,
Sereno, J.).

Q.

Raymund and Reynaldo were extrajudicially
abducted and detained by the military and then
subjectedto torture. Fromtime to time, Raymund
and Reynaldo were given medical treatment.
Eventually, they were able to escape. They
filed a Petition for Writ of Amparo against the
military officers responsible for their abduction
and torture. In their petition, Raymund and
Reynaldoprayed that respondentsfurnish them
with all official and unofficial reports of the
investigationundertakenin connectionwith their
case and that respondentscauseto be produced
all medical reports and records regarding
their treatment.
Respondents argue that the production
order sought by Raymund and Reynaldo
partakes of the characteristics of a search
warrant.Thus, they claim that the requisites for
the issuance of a search warrant must be
complied with prior to the grant of the
production order, namely: (1) the application
must be under oath or affirmation; (2) the search------- warrant must particularly describe the place to
200

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

be searched and the things to be seized; (3)
there exists probable cause with one specific
offense; and (4) the probable cause must be
personally determined by the judge after
examination under oath or affirmation of the
complainantand the witnesses he may produce.
Is the Respondents'argument meritorious?
A.

No. The production order under the Amparo Rule
should not be confusedwith a search warrant for law
enforcement under Article Ill, Section 2 of the 1987
Constitution.This Constitutional provision is a
protection of the people from the unreasonable
intrusion of the government, not a protection of the
governmentfrom the demand of the people, such as
respondents. Instead, the amparo production order
may be likened to the production of documents or
things under R27 which may be employed to compel
production of documents, letters, and objects
which are material and not privileged. (Secretary
of National Defense v. Manalo, 7 October 2008,
Puna, C.J.).

Q.

What is the procedure for hearing?

A.

The hearing on the petition shall be summary. The
court may, however, hold a preliminary conference
to simplify issues and obtain stipulations and
admissions from the parties. (S13 RWA).

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings or papers in a
writ of amparo case?

A.

The following pleadings, motions, or papers are
prohibited:
1) Motion to dismiss.
201

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

2) Motion for extension of time to file opposition,
affidavit, position paper and other pleadings.
3) Dilatory motion for postponement.
4) Motion for a bill of particulars.
5) Counterclaim or cross-claim.
6) Third-party complaint.
7) Reply.
8) Motion to declare respondent in default.
9) Intervention.
10) Memorandum.
11) Motion for reconsideration of
orders or interim relief orders.

interlocutory

12) Certiorari, mandamus, or prohibition against
any interlocutory order.
Note that:
~ Unlike in the Rule on Summary Procedure, motions
to dismiss on whatever ground are prohibited.
~ Counterclaims, even if compulsory, are prohibited.
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure only
permissive counterclaims are not allowed.
~ Apparently, a petition for relief is not prohibited.
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure it is.
~ Motions for reconsideration of interlocutory
orders are prohibited. Motions for Reconsideration
of final orders or judgments are allowed. This is
the reverse of what the Rules on Summary
Procedure provide.

202

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

Q.

In 2009, Christina gave birth to Baby Julian.
Sun and Moon Homefor Childrenshouldered all
the hospital and medical expenses. On 13
August 2009, Christina voluntarily surrendered
Baby Julian by way of a Deed of Voluntary
Commitmentto the DSWD.
Subsequently,the biologicalfather Marcelino
suffered a heart attack and died without
knowing about the birth of his son. Thereafter,
during the wake, Christina disclosed to
Marcelino's family that she and the deceased
had a son that she gave up for adoption due to
financial distress and initial embarrassment.
Marcelino's family was taken aback by the
revelation and sympathized with Christina.
After the emotional revelation, they vowed to
help her recover and raise the baby.
In November 2009, the DSWD, through
Secretary Cabral issued a certificate declaring
Baby Julian as "Legally Available for Adoption."
A local matching conference was held. Baby
Julian was "matched" with the spouses Medina
of the KaisahangBahay Foundation.Supervised
trial custody then commenced.
In May 2010, Christina who had changed
her mind about the adoption, wrote a letter to
the DSWDasking for the suspension of Baby
Julian's adoption proceedings. She also said
she wanted her family back together.
The DSWD stated that the certificate
declaring Baby Julian legally available for
adoption had attained finality on November13,

203

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

2009,or three months after Christina signed the
Deedof Voluntary Commitmentwhich terminated
her parental authority and effectively made Baby
Julian a ward of the State. Christina filed a
petition for a writ of amparo against respondent
DWSDand its officers. In her petition, Christina
accused respondents of "blackmailing" her into
surrendering custody of her child to the DSWD
utilizing what she claims to be an invalid
certificate of availability for adoption which
respondents allegedly used as basis to
misrepresentthat all legal requisitesfor adoption
of the minor child had beencompliedwith.
Christina argued that by making these
misrepresentations, the respondents had acted
beyond the scope of their legal authority
thereby causing the enforced disappearanceof
the said child and depriving her of her custodial
rights and parental authority over him.
Is a petition for a writ of amparo available in
order for a biological mother to recover custody
of child from the DSWD?
A.

No. In this case, Christina alleged that the
respondent DSWD officers caused her "enforced
separation" from Baby Julian and that their action
amounted to an "enforced disappearance" within the
context of the Amparo rule. Contrary to her position,
however, the respondent DSWD officers never
concealed Baby Julian's whereabouts. In fact,
Christina obtained a copy of the DSWD's 28 May
2010 Memorandum explicitly stating that Baby Julian
was in the custody of the Medina Spouses when she
filed her petition before the RTC. Besides, she even

204

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

admitted in her petition for review on certiorari that
the respondent DSWD officers presented Baby
Julian before the RTC during the hearing held in the
afternoon of August 5, 2010. There is therefore,
no "enforced disappearance" as used in the context
of the Amparo rule as the third and fourth elements
are missing.
Christina's directly accusing the respondents of
forcibly separating her from her child and placing
the latter up for adoption, supposedly without
complying with the necessary legal requisites to
qualify the child for adoption, clearly indicates that
she is not searching for a lost child but asserting
her parental authority over the child and contesting
custody over him.
Since it is extant from the pleadings filed that
what is involved is the issue of child custody and
the exercise of parental rights over a child, who, for
all intents and purposes, has been legally
considered a ward of the State, the Amparo rule
cannot be properly applied. (Caram v. Segui, 5

August 2014).
Q.

What is the period and mode of appeal from a
judgmentin a Writ of Amparo case? To what
courtistheappealtaken?

A.

Any party may appeal from the final judgment or
order to the Supreme Court under R45. The period
of appeal shall be 5 working days from notice of the
adverse judgment. (S19 RWA) While not expressly
provided for in the Rules, in case a motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial is filed and
denied, the 5-working-day period should be
205

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

computed from notice of the order denying the
motion for reconsideration or motion for new trial.
(See 825 RWA). The appeal may raise questions of
fact or law or both. (819 RWA).
Q.

What is the quantum of proof needed for the
parties to establish their claims?

A.

Substantial evidence or that amount of relevant
evidence which a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion. (817 RWA;
85 R133).

Q.

Is hearsay admissible in writ of amparo cases?

A.

Yes. Technical rules of evidence are not strictly
observed in writ of amparo case. The rules of
evidence are reduced to the most basic test of
reason - i.e., to the relevance of the evidence to
the issue at hand and its consistency with all other
pieces of adduced evidence. Thus, even hearsay
evidence can be admitted if it satisfies this basic
minimum test. The courts should exercise flexibility
in the consideration of evidence, including hearsay
evidence, in extrajudicial killings and enforced
disappearance cases. (Razon v. Tagitis, 3 December
2009, Brion, J.).

Q.

What is the standard of diligence required of the
respondent in the performance of a duty?

A.

Ordinary diligence if the respondent is a private
individual or entity and extraordinary diligence if the
respondent is a public official or employee. The
respondent public official or employee cannot
invoke the presumption that official duty has been
regularly performed to evade responsibility or
liability. (817 RWA).

206

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

Q.

Does the failure on the part of the public official
to prove that he observed extraordinary
diligence result in the automatic grant of the
privilege of the amparo writ?

A.

No. The failure to establish that the public official
observed extraordinary diligence in the performance of
duty does not result in the automatic grant of the
privilege of the amparo writ. It does not relieve the
petitioner from establishing his or her claim by
substantial evidence. The omission or inaction on
the part of the public official provides, however, some
basis for the petitioner to move and for the court to
grant certain interim reliefs. (Yano v. Sanchez, G.R.
No. 186640, 11 February 2010 [e.b.]).

Q.

Does the Rule on the Writ of Amparo preclude
the filing of a . separate criminal, civil, or
administrativeaction?

A.

No. (S22).

Q.

What is the effect when a criminal action arising
out of the act or omission subject of the
Amparo case has been commenced?

A.

PRECLUSION. In such a case no separate petition
for the writ shall be filed. The reliefs under the writ
shall be available by motion in the criminal case.
CONSOLIDATION. When the criminal action is
filed subsequent to the filing of the petition for the
writ, the latter shall be consolidated with the
criminal action.
When a criminal action and a separate
civil action are filed subsequent to a petition for the
writ, the petition shall be consolidated with the
criminal action.
207

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

After consolidation, the procedure under this
Rule shall continue to apply to the disposition of the
reliefs in the petition. (823).21
Q.

Father Robert Reyes was among those arrested
in connection with the Manila Peninsula Hotel
siege on 30 November2007. Inquestproceedings
for rebellion were conducted. Per the DILG's
request, DOJ Secretary Raul Gonzalez issued a
Hold Departure Order (HDO) against Fr. Reyes.
Subsequently the DOJ panel of Prosecutors
filed an information for rebellion against Fr.
Reyes and other accused before RTC of Makati
City, Branch 150.
Fr. Reyes filed a motion for judicial
determination of probable cause. The judge
dismissed the case for lack of probable cause.
The DOJ filed a motion for reconsideration of
the order of dismissal. Fr. Reyes then filed a
petition for a writ of amparo before the Court of
Appeals contending that the HDO violated his
right to travel. During the pendency of the
amparo case, the RTC issued an order denying
the DOJ's motion for reconsiderationfor lack of
merit. May the writ of amparo issue?

A.

No. Section 22 of the Rule on the Writ of Amparo
provides that when a criminal action has been
commenced, no separate petition for the writ shall
be filed and that the reliefs under the writ shall be
available by motion in the criminal case. Pursuant
to Section 22, Fr. Reyes should have filed with the
211t

is opined that the provisions of the Rule on preclusion (822) and
consolidation (823) should not apply to the independent civil action for damages
and other relief for the violation of the civil liberties mentioned in Art. 32 of the
Civil Code. Otherwise a procedural rule would be undermining a substantive right
under the Civil Code.

208

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Amparo

RTC-Makati a motion to lift the HOO. Despite the
denial of the DOJ's MR of the dismissal of the case,
the trial court has not lost control over the criminal
case which is still pending before it. By virtue of its
residual power, the court a quo retains the authority
to entertain incidents in the instant case to the
exclusion of even the Supreme Court. (Reyes v.
Gonzalez, 3 December 2009 [e.b.])
Q.

Are decisions in writ of amparo and writ of
habeas corpus cases immediatelyexecutory?

A.

Yes. There is no need to file a motion for execution
for an amparo or habeas corpus decision. Hence
in a case, the CA erred in ruling that its directive
to immediately release Sherlyn, Karen and Merino
was not automatically executory and that petitioners
should have filed a motion for writ of execution.
That would defeat the very purpose of having
summary proceedings in amparo petitions. Summary
proceedings are immediately executory without
prejudice to appeal. (Boac v. Cadapan, 31 May
2011, Carpio Morales, J.)

209

J9JC9B0M

RULE ON THE WRIT OF HABEAS DATA
(eff. 2 February 2008)
Q.

What is the writ of habeas data?

A.

A remedy available to any person whose right to
privacy in life, liberty or security is violated or
threatened by an unlawful act or omission of a
public official or employee, or of a private individual
or entity engaged in the gathering or storing of data
or information regarding the person, family, home,
and correspondence of the aggrieved party. (S1,
Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data [RHO]

Q.

Police Officer Guapo visited his live-in partner
Ganda's house but inadvertently left his camera
there. Ganda got hold of the camera and
discovered sex videos of Guapo with another
women. Ganda confronted Guapo and the two
had a fight. She showed the videos to
NAPOLCOMofficers and threatened to file an
administrative case against Guapo using the
videos as evidence. Guapo filed a petition for
habeas data against Ganda with the RTCwhich
after hearing granted the privilege of the writ by
ordering the implementing officer to turn over
the subject videos to Guapoand enjoined Ganda
from further reproducing the videos. Ganda
appealedto SC. Was the grant of the privilege of
the writ of habeasdata proper?

A.

No. A petition for habeas data must adequately show
that there exists a nexus between the right to
privacy on the one hand, and the right to life, liberty,
or security, on the other. Here Guapo's petition failed
to allege such nexus. He also failed to show by
substantial evidence that the violation of his right to

210

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

privacy over the videos would violate his rights to
life, liberty, or security. (Lee v. Ilagan, 8 Oct 2014).
Q.

Petitioner was a mayor of a town in llocos
Norte. In December 2009, former President
Gloria Macapagal-Arroyoissued Administrative
Order No. 275, "Creating an Independent
Commission to Address the Alleged Existence
of Private Armies in the Country." The body,
which was later on referred to as the Zefiarosa
Commission, was formed to investigate the
existence of private army groups (PAGs)in the
country with a view to eliminating them before
the 10 May2010elections and dismantling them
permanentlyin the future.
Gamboaalleged that the PNP-llocos Norte
conducted a series of surveillance operations
against her and her aides, and classified her as
someone who keeps a PAG. Purportedly
without the benefit of data verification, PNPllocos Norteforwardedthe information gathered
on her to the Zenarosa Commission, thereby
causing her inclusion in the Report's
enumerationof individuals maintainingPAGs.
Contending that her right to privacy was
violated and her reputation maligned and
destroyed, Gamboa filed a Petition for the
issuance of a writ of habeas data against
respondents in their capacities as officials of
the PNP-llocos Norte. Should Gamboa be
granted the privilege of the writ of habeasdata?

A.

No. The right to informational privacy, as a specific
component of the right to privacy, may yield to an
overriding legitimate state interest, in this case, the
211

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

interest of the State in dismantling private armed
groups. (Gamboa v. Chan, 24 July 2012, e.b.,
Sereno, J.).
Q.

Where may the petition for a writ of habeas data
be filed?

A.

It may be filed with the RTC where petitioner or
respondent resides or that which has jurisdiction
over the place where the data or information is
gathered or stored, at petitioner's option. It may also
be filed with the Sandiganbayan, Court of Appeals,
and the Supreme Court if the petition concerns
public data files of government offices. (S3 RHO)

Q.

What is the territorial extent of the writ of
habeas data's enforceability?

A.

Anywhere in the Philippines.

Q.

Who may file a petition for a writ of habeas data?

A.

The aggrieved party. However, in cases of extralegal
killings and enforced disappearances, the petition
may be filed by a member of the aggrieved party's
immediate family or in default thereof by a relative
within the 4th civil degree. (S2 RHO).

Q.

What are the contents of the petition for
issuance of a writ of habeas data?

A.

A verified petition for a writ of habeas data should
contain the:
(a) Personal circumstances of the petitioner and
respondent;
(b) Manner of violation of the right to privacy and
how it affects the right to life, liberty or security
of the aggrieved party;
212

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

(c) Actions and recourses taken by petitioner to
secure the data or information;
(d) Location of the files, the government office, and
the person in charge or in control of the data or
information, if known;
(e) The reliefs prayed for, which may include the
updating, rectification,suppressionor destruction
of the databaseor informationor files kept by the
respondent; or in case of threats, an order
enjoiningthe act complainedof; and
(f) Other relevant reliefs as may be just and
equitable. (S6 RHO).
Q.

Should the respondent file a return? If so, within
what period?

A.

The respondent shall file a verified return together
with supporting affidavits within 5 working days
after service of the writ. The period to file a return
may be reasonably extended by the court for
justifiable reasons. (S10 RHO).

Q.

What are the contents of the return?

A.

The return together with supporting affidavits shall,
among other things, contain the following:
(a) Lawful defenses.
(b) In case of a respondent in charge or in control
of the data or information subject of the petition:
(i) disclosure of the data, the nature of such
data, and the purpose for its collection;
(ii) the steps taken by the respondent to ensure
the security and confidentiality of the data;
213

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(iii) the currency and accuracy of the data held;
and
(c) Other allegations relevant to the resolution of the
proceeding. A general denial of the allegations in
the petition shall not be allowed. (810 RHO).
Q.

What are the effects of the failure to file the return?

A.

The effects of the failure to file the return are the
following:
(1) The court shall proceed to hear the petition ex
parte granting the petitioner such relief as the
petition may warrant unless the court in its
discretion requires the petitioner to submit
evidence. (814 RHO).
(2) The court may cite for contempt a respondent
who refuses to make a return. (811 RHO).

Q.

What is the procedurefor hearing?

A.

The hearing on the petition shall be summary. The
court may, however, hold a preliminary conference
to simplify issues and obtain stipulations and
admissions from the parties. The hearing shall be
from day to day until completed and shall be given
the same priority as petitions for habeas corpus.
(813 RWA).

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadingsor papers in a
writ of habeas data case?

A.

The following pleadings, motions, or papers are
prohibited:
1) Motion to dismiss.

214

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

2) Motion for extension of time to file return,
opposition, affidavit, position paper and other
pleadings.
3) Dilatory motion for postponement.
4) Motion for a bill of particulars.
5) Counterclaim or cross-claim.
6) Third-party complaint.
7) Reply.
8) Motion to declare respondent in default.
9) Intervention.
10) Memorandum.
11) Motion for reconsideration of interlocutory
orders or interim relief orders.
12) Certiorari, mandamus, or prohibition against
any interlocutory order.
Note that:

~ Unlike in the Rule on Summary Procedure,
motions to dismiss on whatever ground are prohibited.
All defenses or objections should be raised in the return
which must be filed within 5 working days from service
of the writ. The period may be reasonably extended by
the court for justifiable reasons. If no return filed, the
court shall hear the petition ex parte. Court may also
cite the respondent who refuses to make a return in
contempt.
~ Counterclaims, even if compulsory, are
prohibited. Under the Rule on Summary Procedure only
permissive counterclaims are not allowed.
215

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

~ Apparently, a petition for relief is not prohibited.
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure it is.
~
Motions for reconsideration of interlocutory
orders are prohibited. Motions for Reconsideration of final
orders or judgments are allowed. This is the reverse of
what the Rules on Summary Procedure provide.
Q.

What is the period and mode of appeal from a
judgment in a Writ of Habeas Data case? To
what court is the appeal taken?

A.

Any party may appeal from the final judgment or
order to the Supreme Court under R45. The period
of appeal shall be 5 working days from notice of the
adverse judgment. (S19 RHO) While not expressly
provided for in the Rules, in case a motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial is filed and
denied, the 5-working-day period should be
computed from notice of the order denying the
motion for reconsideration or motion for new trial.
(S24 RHO). The appeal may raise questions of fact
or law or both. (S19 RHO).

Q.

What is the quantum of proof of the allegations
in a writ of habeas data case?

A.

Substantial evidence or that amount of relevant
evidence which a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion. (S16 RHO; S5
R133).

Q.

When may a hearing in chambersbe conducted?

A.

A hearing in chambers (in camera) may be
conducted where the respondent invokes the
defense that the release of the data or information
in question shall compromise national security or
state secrets, or when the data or information
216

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

cannot be divulged to the public due to its nature or
privileged character. (812 RHO).
Q.

What is the effect of the filing of a criminal action?

A.

When a criminal action has been commenced, no
separate petition for the writ shall be filed. The
reliefs under the writ shall be available by motion in
the criminal case. (822 RHO).
When a criminal action is filed after the filing of
the petition for the writ, the latter shall be
consolidatedwith the criminal action.
When a criminal action and a separate civil
action are filed subsequent to a petition for a writ of
amparo, the latter shall be consolidated with the
criminal action. (821 RH0).22

Q.

Azenith, the cashier of Temptation Investments,
Inc. (Temptation, Inc.) with principal offices in
Cebu City, is equally hated and loved by her coemployees because she extends cash advances
or "vales " to her colleagues whom she likes.
One morning, Azenith discovers an anonymous
letter inserted under the door of her office
threatening to kill her. Azenith promptly reports
the matter to her superior Joshua, who
thereupon conducts an internal investigation to
verify the said threat. Claiming that the threat is
real, Temptation, Inc. opts to transfer Azenith to
its PalawanOffice, a move she resists in view of

221!
is opined that the provisions of the Rule on preclusion (822) and
consolidation (821) should not apply to the independent civil action for damages
and other relief for the violation of the civil liberties mentioned in Art. 32 of the
Civil Code. Otherwise a procedural rule would be undermining a substantive
right under the Civil Code.

217

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the company's refusal to disclose the results
of its investigation.
Decrying the move as a virtual deprivation
of her employment, Azenith files a petition for
the issuance of a writ of habeas data before the
Regional Trial Court (RTC) to enjoin Temptation,
Inc. from transferring her on the ground that the
company's refusal to provide her with a copy of
the investigation results compromises her right
to life, liberty and privacy. Resolve the petition.
Explain. (10 Bar Q20).
A.

The petition should be denied.
Under the Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data,
the writ is available in cases where a person's right
to privacy in life, liberty, or security is violated or
threatened by an unlawful act of an entity engaged
in the gathering, collecting, or storing of data or
information regarding the person, family, home, or
correspondence of the aggrieved party.
The writs of amparo and habeas data will NOT
issue to protect purely property or commercial
concerns nor when the grounds invoked in support of
the petitions therefor are vague or doubtful.
Employment constitutes a property right under the
context of the due process clause of the Constitution.
It is evident that respondent's reservations on the real
reasons for her transfer - a legitimate concern
respecting the terms and conditions of one's
employment - are what prompted her to adopt the
extraordinary remedy of habeas data. Jurisdiction
over such concerns is inarguably lodged by law with
the NLRC and the Labor Arbiters. (Meralco v. GopezLim, 5 October 2010, e.b., Carpio-Morales, J.).
218

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

Q.

Julia and Julienne, both minors, were graduating
high school students at St. Theresa's College
(STC), Cebu City. Sometime in January 2012,
while changing into their swimsuits for a beach
party they were about to attend, Julia and
Julienne, along with several others, took digital
pictures of themselves clad only in their
undergarments.
Thesepictureswerethen uploaded
by Angelaon her Facebookprofile.
Back at the school, Mylene Escudero, a
computer teacher at STC's high school
department, learned from her students that
some seniors at STC posted pictures online,
depicting themselves from the waist up,
dressed only in brassieres. Escudero then
asked her students if they knew who the girls in
the photos were. In turn, they readily identified
Julia, Julienne, and Chloe, among others.
Using STC'scomputers,Escudero'sstudents
logged in to their respective personal Facebook
accounts and showed her photos of the
identified students. What is more, Escudero's
students  claimed that there were times when
access to or the availability of the identified
students' photos was not confined to the girls'
Facebookfriends, but were, in fact, viewable by
any Facebookuser.
Upon discovery, Escudero reported the
matter and, through one of her student's
Facebook page, showed the photos to Kristine
Rose Tigol (Tigol), STC's Discipline-in-Charge,
for appropriate action. Thereafter, following an
investigation, STC found the identified students
to have deported themselves in a manner
219

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

proscribed by the school's Student Handbook
and barred them from participating in the
graduation rites.
Despite the issuance of the TROby a court,
STC,nevertheless,barredthe sanctionedstudents
from participating in the graduation rites,
arguing that, on the date of the commencement
exercises,its advertedmotion for reconsideration
on the issuanceof the TROremainedunresolved.
Thereafter, petitioners filed before the RTC
a Petition for the Issuance of a Writ of Habeas
Data alleging that their children's right to
informational privacy was violated and praying
that (a) a writ of habeas data be issued; (b)
respondents be ordered to surrender and
deposit with the court all soft and printed
copies of the subject data before or at the
preliminary hearing; and (c) after trial, judgment
be rendered declaring all information, data, and
digital images accessed, saved or stored,
reproduced, spread and used, to have been
illegally obtained in violation of the children's
right to privacy.
The RTCissued the writ of habeasdata and
directed the Respondentsto file their return. In
their return, the Respondents raised the
following defenses:
a) Habeas data does lie against STC, it not
beingan entity engagedin the gathering,collecting
or storing of data or information regarding the
person, family, home and correspondence of
the aggrieved party.

220

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

b) There can be no violation of their right
to privacy as there is no reasonable expectation
of privacy on Facebook.
Decide the case.

A.

The petition for habeas data should not be granted.
a) To be sure, nothing in the Rule would suggest
that the habeas data protection shall be
available only against abuses of a person or
entity engaged in the business of gathering,
storing, and collecting of data.
Section 1 of the Rule on the Writ of Habeas
Data, when taken in its proper context, as a whole,
irresistibly conveys the idea that habeas data is a
protection against unlawful acts or omissions of
public officials and of private individuals or entities
engaged in gathering, collecting, or storing data
about the aggrieved party and his or her
correspondences, or about his or her family. Such
individual or entity need not be in the business of
collecting or storing data.
To "engage" in something is different from
undertaking a business endeavour. To "engage"
means "to do or take part in something." It does not
necessarily mean that the activity must be done in
pursuit of a business. What matters is that the
person or entity must be gathering, collecting or
storing said data or information about the aggrieved
party or his or her family. Whether such undertaking
carries the element of regularity, as when one
pursues a business, and is in the nature of a
personalendeavour,for any other reason or even for
no reason at all, is immaterial and such will not
preventthe writ from getting to said person or entity.
221

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

To agree with respondents' above argument,
would mean unduly limiting the reach of the writ to
a very small group, i.e., private persons and entities
whose business is data gathering and storage, and
in the process decreasing the effectiveness of the
writ as an instrument designed to protect a right which
is easily violated in view of rapid advancements in the
information and communications technology-a
right which a great majority of the users of
technology themselves are not capable of protecting.
b) Nonetheless,
there
is
no
right to
informational privacy on photos posted on
Facebook. It is well to note that not one of petitioners
disputed Escudero's sworn account that her
students, who are the minors' Facebook "friends,"
showed her the photos using their own Facebook
accounts. This only goes to show that no special
means to be able to view the allegedly private posts
were ever resorted to by Escudero's students, and
that it is reasonable to assume, therefore, that the
photos were, in reality, viewable either by (1) their
Facebook friends, or (2) by the public at large.
Considering that the default setting for Facebook
posts is "Public," it can be surmised that the
photographs in question were viewable to everyone on
Facebook, absent any proof that petitioners' children
positively limited the disclosure of the photograph. If
such were the case, they cannot invoke the protection
attached to the right to informational privacy.
That the photos are viewable by "friends only"
does not necessarily bolster the petitioners'
contention. In this regard, the cyber community is
agreed that the digital images under this setting still
remain to be outside the confines of the zones of

222

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

privacy in view of the sheer number of Facebook
"friends" and the facility in which photos can be
shared even to those who are not "friends."
It is well to emphasizeat this point that setting a
post's or profile detail's privacy to "Friends" is no
assurance that it can no longer be viewed by
another user who is not Facebook friends with the
source of the content. The user's own Facebook
friend can share said content or tag his or her own
Facebook friend thereto, regardless of whether the
user tagged by the latter is F acebook friends or not
with the former. Also, when the post is shared or
when a person is tagged, the respective Facebook
friends of the person who shared the post or who
was tagged can view the post, the privacy setting of
which was set at "Friends." (Vivares v. St. Theresa's
College, 29 September2014, Velasco, J.).
Q.

Distinguish the petitions for writ of habeas
corpus, writ of amparo, and writ of habeas data:

HABEAS CORPUS

AMPARO

HABEAS DATA

Governing
rule

Rule 103

Rule on the Writ
of Amparo

Rule on the Writ
of Habeas Data

Available
to whom

Person
illegally
deprived of
liberty or from
whom rightful
custody of
any person is
withheld

Person whose
right to life,
liberty, and
security has been
violated or
threatened with
violation by public
or private
individual or
entity. Extends to
extralegal killings
or enforced

Person whose
right to privacy in
life, liberty or
security is
violated or
threatened by an
unlawful act or
omission of a
public or private
individual or
entity engaged in
the aatherina or

223

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Jurisdiction/

disappearances
or threats thereof.

storing of data or
information
regarding the
person, family,
home, and
correspondence
of the aggrieved
oartv.

SC,CA,SB

SC,CA,SB

SC,CA,SB
(public data files
of govt offices)

RTC in the
judicial region
where writ
sought to be
enforced.

RTC where
threat, act or
omission
committed or
where any of its
elements
occurred.

RTC where
petitioner or
respondent
resides or that
which has
jurisdiction over
the place where
the data or
information is
gathered or
stored, at
petitioner's
option.

where filed

MTC (in the
absence of
all RTC
judges in the
province
or city)
Who may
file

Aggrieved
party or any
person on his
behalf.

Aggrieved party
or by following in
the order
mentioned:
Immediate familx,
relative within 4 h
degree, and
concerned citizen
or oroanlzatlon,

Aggrieved party.
In cases of
EKED, immediate
family, or, in
default thereof,
relative within 41h
degree.

Docket
fees

P500 (S?[g]
R141)

Exempt

P500 (S?[g]
R141 ), indigent
petitioner exempt

Extent of

SC CA SB:
Anywhere

Anywhere

Anywhere

enforceability

224

J9JC9B0M

Rule On The Writ Of Habeas Data

RTC/MTC:
w/in judicial
reqion
Interim
reliefs

N.A.

Available (PWIT)

N.A.

Filing of
return

Return to be
made on date
and time
specified in
writ (86 & 8

Return must be
filed within 5
working days
from service of

Return must be
filed within 5
working days
from service of

the writ. No
extension except
on highly
meritorious
mounds.

the writ.
Reasonable
extension for
justifiable reason

R102)

Appeal

Notice of
appeal within
48 hours
from notice

R45 w/in 5
working days
from notice

R45 w/in 5
working days
from notice

Primacy of
criminal
action

Not subject to
primacy of
criminal
action. (Art.
32[4], Civil
Code)

Subject to
primacy of
criminal action
(822 & 23 RWA)

Subject to
primacy of
criminal action
(821 & 22 RHO)

Quantum
of proof

Preponderan
ce of
evidence (81
R133)

Substantial
evidence (817
RWA)

Substantial
evidence (816
RHO)

225

J9JC9B0M

RULE 103. CHANGE OF NAME
Q.

What is the statutory basis of Rule 103?

A.

Article 376 of the Civil Code which provides that
"[n]o person can change his name and surname
without judicial authority."

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction
over petitions for change of name?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 19(7) of B.P. Big. 129.

Q.

What is the venue for the special proceeding for
change of name?

A.

With the Regional Trial Court of the place where the
petitioner resides.

Q.

Can an alien file a petitionfor change of name?

A.

Yes provided he is domiciled in the Philippines.
(Ong Huan Tin v. Republic, G.R. No. L-20997, 27
April 1967).

Q.

What is the name that may be changed under
Rule 103?

A.

Rule 103 covers principally the change of surname
and middle name. For change of first name and/or
nickname, the principal governing law is R.A. No.
9048 which authorizes the local civil registrar or the
consul general to effect such change.

Q.

May a change of name be effected administratively?

A.

The general rule is that a change of name may only
be effected by a judicial order. (Article 412, Civil
Code). However under R.A. No. 9048 (approved 22
March 2001 ), a change of first name or nickname

226

J9JC9B0M

Rule 103
Change Of Name

may be done administratively under the procedure
set forth therein.
Q.

Differentiate change of name from correction of
entry of name.

A.

In order to differentiate change of name from
correction of entry of name, it must be first
understoodthat the real or official name of a person
is that which is given in the civil register, not the
name by which he was baptized in his church or by
which he has been known in the community. ( San
Roque v. Republic, G.R. L-22035, 30 April 1968).
Hence any petition which seeks to change the name
recorded in the civil registry is a petition for change
of name governed by R103. On the other hand,
mere correction of typographicalor clerical errors in
the entry of the name which are obvious to the
understandingare governed by R108. (Republic v.
Mercadera, G.R. No.186027, 8 December2010).

Q.

In June 2005 Merlyn L. Mercadera sought before
the Local Civil Registrar of Dipolog City the
correction of her name as it appeared in the birth
certificate from Marilyn L. Mercadera to Merlyn L.
Mercadera. The LCR of Dipolog City however
refused to act on the correction unless a court
order was obtained since he was not yet
equipped with a permanent appointment.
Merlyn L. Mercadera thus filed a petition under
Rule 108 with the RTC of Dipolog City to correct
her name appearing in the birth certificate as
Marilyn L. Mercadera to Merlyn L. Mercadera, the
name she has been using since childhood and in
her official and school records. The RTC granted
the petition. On appeal, the OSG asked that the
RTC's decision be set aside as the proper

227

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

remedy that should have been availed of is Rule
103 for change of name and not Rule 108 for
correction of entries. Is the OSG correct?

A.

No. If what a petitioner seeks to do is simply to
correct a typographical or clerical error in the entry
of her name, then the procedure to be followed is
Rule 108 and not Rule 103. On the other hand,
Rule 103 is based on change of name which is not
simply a correction of a typographical or clerical
error, as where the name is dishonorable or is
indicative of former alienage. Here the correction of
a patently misspelled name (Marilyn to Merlyn) is
proper under Rule 108. The RTC did not allow
Merlyn Mercadera to change her name. What it did
allow was the correction of her misspelled given
name which she has been using ever since she
could remember. (Republic v. Mercadera, G.R. No.
186027, 8 December 2010).

Q.

Give examples of clerical or typographical errors
in name whose correction is proper under R108.

A.
1) To change first name of "Sincio" to "Sencio."
2) "Beatriz Labayo/Beatriz Labayu" to "Ernperatriz Labayo."
-3) "Midael C. Mazon" to "Michael C. Mazon."
(Republic v. Mercadera, supra).
Q.

In November 2000, Lorena Sali filed a petition for
correction under R108 of her first name from
"Dorothy" to "Lorena." She alleges that her
name was erroneously recorded as "Dorothy"
rather than "Lorena," that "Lorena" is the name
she has been using for as long as she can
228

J9JC9B0M

Rule 103
Change Of Name

remember and that she is known to the
community as such. The petition was granted
upon compliance by Sali with the mandatory
requirementsfor an adversarial proceeding. On
appeal, the Republic contends that the judgment
should be set aside because the proper remedy
that should have been availed of was R103 and
not R108 since the change from "Dorothy" to
"Lorena" is not a mere clerical or typographical
error but involvesa substantialchange.
a) Should the judgmentbe set aside?
b) Would your answer be the same if the
petition was filed in May 2001?
A.
a) No, the judgment should not be set aside. Sali's
petition is not for a change of name as
contemplated under R103 but for correction of
entries under R108. What she seeks is the
correction of clerical errors which were committed
in the recording of her name and birth date. The
Supreme Court has held that not all alterations
allowed in one's name are confined under R103
and that corrections for clerical errors may be set
right under R108. The evidence presented by Sali
show that, since birth, she has been using the
name "Lorena." Thus, it is apparent that she never
had any intention to change her name. What she
seeks is simply the removal of the clerical fault or
error in her first name, and to set aright the same to
conform to the name she grew up with. (Republic
v. Safi, 3 April 2017, Peralta, J.).23
231t
is opined that the Republic was correct and that R103 was the
appropriate remedy since the change of name from "Dorothy" to "Lorena" was

229

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) Yes. In such case, the petition, insofar as it
prayed for the change of Sali's first name, was
not within the RTC's primary jurisdiction but of
the LCR pursuant to R.A. No. 9048. It was
improper
because the remedy should have
been administrative, i.e., filing of the petition
with the local civil registrar concerned. For
failure to exhaust administrative remedies, the
RTC should have dismissed the petition to
correct Sali's first name. (lbid.)24
Q.

What are the contents of the petition for change
of name?

A.

The petition shall be signed and verified by the
person desiring to change his name, or some other
person in his behalf, and shall set forth:
1) That the petitioner has been a bona fide resident
of the province where the petition is filed for at
least 3 years prior to the date of such filing;
2) The cause for which the change
petitioner's name is sought; and

of the

3) The name asked for. (S2 R103).
Q.

What are the valid grounds for a change of name?

A.

The following are valid grounds for a change of
name (DR DACUL):

substantial. Nonetheless the result reached is correct since the mandatory
requirements for an adversarial proceeding were complied with by Sali. (See
Republic v. Mercadera, supra.
24The
reasoning of the Court is somewhat confusing. The Court held that
prior to the effectivity of R.A. 9048, the proper proceeding was under R108 and
not R103. However when citing R.A. No. 9048, the Court did not say that the
petition should be brought as a petition for correction of clerical or typographical
error but stated that it should be brought as a petition for change of first name.

230

J9JC9B0M

Rule 103
Change Of Name

a) When the name is ridiculous, gishonorable, or
extremely gifficult to write or pronounce;
b) When the change results as a legal consequence,
as in legitimation;
c) When the change will avoid _gonfusion;
d) When the petitioner has been !:!,Sing a name for
school purposes and his school records are in
such name, then his name in the civil registry
may be changed to the name that he has been
using in school;
e) A sincere desire to adopt a Filipino name to
erase signs of former ~lienage.
Q.

Are the above grounds exclusive?

A.

No. The matter of whether to grant a petition for
change of name is left to the sound discretion of the
court. The petition should be granted where there is
proper and reasonable cause and where there is no
showing that the petition was motivated by
fraudulent intent or that the change of surname will
prejudice public interest. (Oshita v. Republic, G.R.
No. L-21180, 31 March 1967).

Q.

If the petition is sufficient in form and substance,
what is the next step to be done by the court?

A.

The court, by an order reciting the purpose of the
petition, shall fix a date and place for the hearing
thereof, and shall direct that a copy of the order be
published before the hearing at least once a week
for 3 consecutive weeks in some newspaper of
general circulation published in the province. The
date set for the hearing shall not be within 30 days
231

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

prior to an election nor within 4 months after the
last publication of the notice. (83 R 103 ).
Q.

Is the Singaporean practice of not carrying a
middle name enough to justifya child born of a
Singaporean father and a Filipino mother, but
whose birth was registeredin the Philippines,to
change his name by dropping the middle name
(surname of the mother)?

A.

No. To justify a change of middle name, the
petitioner must not only show proper and
compelling reason therefor but also that he will be
prejudiced by the use of his true name.
Convenience for the child shall not suffice. How
such change of name would make his integration
into Singaporean society easier and convenient is
not clearly established. That the continued use of
his middle name would cause confusion and
difficulty does not constitute proper and reasonable
cause to drop it from his registered complete name.
In addition, petitioner is only a minor.
Considering the nebulous foundation on which his
petition for change of name is based, it is best that
the matter of change of his name be left to his
judgment and discretion when he reaches the age of
majority. As he is of tender age, he may not yet
understand and appreciate the value of the change
of his name and granting of the same at this point
may just prejudice him in his rights under our laws.
(In Re Petition for Change of Name and/or
Correction of Entry in the Civil Registry of Julian Un
Carulasan Wang, G.R. No. 159966, 30 March 2005)

232

J9JC9B0M

Rule 103
Change Of Name

Q.

Lua Ong is a Chinese, Lua being the surname
and Ong the first name. He bore a son. The
midwife who acted as the informant in the birth
certificate thought that Ong was the surname.
Not given any information as to what the child's
first name should be, she just reported "Baby
Ong" as the name. The child was however
known in the community and used the name
"Lua An Jok." The father filed a petition to
change the name in the birth certificate from
"Baby Ong" to "Lua An Jok." The caption of the
petition as set forth in the order of hearing
which was published once a week for 3
consecutive weeks did not set forth "Lua An
Jok," the name asked for, although this was
contained in the body of the petition. The court
grantedthe petition.
a) Is the petition covered by change of name
under. R103 or correction of entries under
R108?
b) May the judgment of the court granting the
petition be set aside?

A.
a) It is covered by change of name under R103.
The child's real name was "Baby Ong." A
person's real or official name is that which is
given in the civil registry. Since the petition
seeks to change this, it is a change of name
governed by R 103.
b) Yes. Publication of the order of hearing under
83 R103 is a jurisdictional requirement and a
defective publication will not confer jurisdiction
upon the court. Such publication must give the
233

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

correct information as to (1) name or names of
the applicant; (2) the cause for the change of
name; and (3) the new name sought to be
adopted. The title or caption must include the
applicant's real name and his aliases or other
names, and should recite the name sought to
be adopted.
Here the caption of the petition as published in
the order did not contain the name sought, that is,
"Lua An Jok." The fact that it was mentioned in the
body of the petition is of no moment. A petition for
change of name is a proceeding in rem and hence
the publication should include the correct information
in order to vest jurisdiction upon the court. (Republic
v. Tanada, G.R. No. L-31563, 29 November 1971).
Q.

Pernito, also known in the community as
Peregrino,filed a petition for changeof nameto
Pedro. The name Peregrino appeared in the
body of the petition but not in the caption.
When the petition was published, the caption
and the body of the petition were merely lifted
verbatim, so that as published, the petition's
caption still did not contain Peregrino as the
petitioner's alias. The governmentlawyer filed
a motion to dismiss on the ground that,
notwithstanding publication for the requisite
number of times, the court did not acquire
jurisdiction over the petition becausepetitioner's
alias (Peregrino)did not appearin the published
caption. The court deniedthe motion to dismiss
with the ruling that there was substantial
compliancewith the law and that the omission
of the alias in the caption may be deemed de
minimis becausethe alias was clearly set forth
in the petition itself. Was the court correct
234

J9JC9B0M

Rule 103
Change Of Name

in denying the motion to dismiss? Explain.
(92 Bar Q10).

A.

No, the court was not correct in denying the motion
to dismiss.
The Supreme Court has held that the caption
of the petition as published must contain the
applicant's real name, and his aliases or other
names, and should recite the name sought to be
adopted. The fact that the aliases were mentioned
in the body of the petition itself is of no moment.
Here the caption of the petition as published
did not contain the alias Peregrino. This was a
jurisdictional defect and hence the court did not
acquire jurisdiction over the petition. (Republic v.
Tanada, 29 November 1971; Go v. Republic, 77
SCRA 65).
Note: There is an imperfection in the drafting
of the question. What is required to be published is
the order of the hearing not the petition.

Q.

Should the local civil registrar be impleaded in a
petition for change of name under Rule 103?

A.

No. Unlike Rule 108, the local civil registrar need
not be impleaded in a petition for change of name.
However a copy of the judgment or order shall be
furnished the civil registrar of the city or municipality
where the court issuing the same is situated, who
shall forthwith enter the same in the civil register.
(S6 R103).

235

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May a petition for adoption include a petition
for change of the adoptee's first name or is
the change of name limited only to the
adoptee's surname?

A.

The petition for adoption may include a petition for
change of the adoptee's first name. There are no
restrictions in this regard under S10 of the Rules on
Adoption. In fact S10(c) states that in case the
petition also prays for change of name, the title or
caption must contain the registered name of the child
and the full name by which the child is to be known.

236

J9JC9B0M

RULE 108. CANCELLATION OR
CORRECTION OF ENTRIES
IN THE CIVIL REGISTRY
Q.

What is the statutory basis of Rule 108?

A.

The statutory basis of Rule 108 is Article 412 of the
Civil Code which provides that "[n]o entry in a civil
register shall be changed or corrected, without a
judicial order."

Q.

Who may file a petition for cancellation or
correction of entries in the civilregistry?

A. Any person interested in an act, event, order or
decree concerning the civil status of persons which
has been recorded in the civil register, may file a
verified petition for the cancellation or correction of
any entry relating thereto. (81 R108).
Q.

What is the correction of entries covered under
R108?

A.

R108 covers principally correction of entries which
are not merely clerical or typographical errors. For
correction of clerical or typographical errors, the
principal governing law is R.A. No. 9048 which
authorizes the local civil registrar or the consul
general to effect such corrections.
In Republic v. Cagandahan, G.R. No. 166676,
12 September 2008, it was held that R.A. No. 9048
removed from the ambit of R 108 correction of
clerical or typographical errors and that R 108
applies only to substantial changes or corrections
of entries in the civil register. It is opined that it is
more precise to state that R108 is still available for

237

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

correction of-clerical or typographical errors, albeit
as a secondary recourse.
Q.

Maycorrectionof entriesbe doneadministratively?

A.

Yes. Clerical or typographical errors may be
corrected administratively by the city or municipal
civil registrar or the consul general pursuant to the
procedure set forth in R.A. No. 9048.

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction
over petitions under R108?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Act
of 1948, which provides that the Court of First
Instance (now RTC) shall have original and
exclusive jurisdiction over special proceedings not
otherwise provided for by law. This provision was
not repealed by B.P. Big. 129.

Q.

Where is the venue of the petition?

A.

Venue lies in the place where the corresponding
civil registry is located. (S1 R108).

Q.

Petitioner married a Canadianman in DavaoCity.
They flew to Canada where the petitioner had a
daughter with her husband. Her birth was
recorded in the national office of the Philippine
Statistics Authority (PSA)in Manila.However her
year of birth was erroneously indicated as 2016
rather than 2015. Petitioner filed a petition under
R108with the RTCof DavaoCity. The court motu
proprio dismissed the petition on ground of
"lack of jurisdiction" stating that the petition
should have been filed in RTC of Manila where
the corresponding civil registry is located. Was
the RTC's dismissal order correct?
238

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

A

Yes. Given that Rule 108 pertains to a special
proceeding, the specific provisions stated thereunder,
particularly on venue under S1, must be observed in
order to vest the court with jurisdiction.
Moreover the petitioner did not implead the
local civil registrar who is an indispensable party.
The inescapable consequence of the failure to
implead the civil registrar is that the RTC will not
acquire jurisdiction over the case. (Fox v. Philippine
Statistics Authority, 6 March 2019, Reyes, J.).25

Q.

Petitioner was born in 1989 in Sabah, Malaysia. It
was only in 2008 that her mother reported her
birth to the Philippine Statistics Authority in
Quezon City. However her birth year was
erroneously recorded as 1980 instead of 1989.
She filed a petition under R108 with the RTC of
Davao City, where she resides, to correct her year
of birth in her report of birth. The RTC motu
proprio dismissed the petition on the ground of
improper venue stating that under 51 R108 the
petition should have been filed with the RTC of
Quezon City. Was the dismissal correct?

A

No. Venue is procedural, not jurisdictional, and
hence, may be waived. It was erroneous for the
RTC to motu proprio dismiss the petition before it
on the ground of improper venue. Since convenience
is the raison d'etre of the rules on venue, and as it
was established that Davao City is the residence of
petitioner, and as further pointed out by the OSG,

251t
is submitted that the ruling is not in accordance with the law. First 81
R108 is a provision on venue not jurisdiction. It is axiomatic that a court cannot
dismiss a case motu proprio on the ground of improper venue. It is also wellsettled that failure to implead an indispensable party is not a ground for
dismissal.

239

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

PSA has a field office located in Davao City, it is
the most convenient for the parties.
Moreover, it is well-settled that courts may not
motu proprio dismiss the case on the ground of
improper venue. Without any objection at the
earliest opportunity, as in a motion to dismiss or in
the answer, it is deemed waived. The OSG did not
register any objection to the venue of the petition.
(Cabrera v. Philippine Statistics Authority, 3 June
2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).26
Q.

Who shall be made parties to the proceeding?

A.

When cancellation or correction of an entry in the
civil register is sought, the civil registrar and all
persons who have or claim any interest which
would be affected thereby shall be made parties to
the proceeding. (S3 R108).

Q.

Upon the filing of the petition, what shall the
courtdo?

A.

The court shall, by an order, fix the time and place
for the hearing of the petition and cause reasonable
notice thereof to be given to the persons named in
the petition. The order shall be published once a
week for 3 consecutive weeks (1 x 3) in a
newspaper of general circulation in the province.

Q.

How many sets of notices are required under
R108?

A.

A reading of S3 & 4 R108 readily shows that R108
mandates two sets of notices to different potential
oppositors. The first notice is that given to the
26

1t is submitted that Cabrera, as opposed to Fox, is the correct application

of the law.

240

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

persons "named in the petition" made by impleading
them and giving them personal notice. The second
(which is through publication) is that given to other
persons not named in the petition but nonetheless
may be considered interested or affected parties,
such as creditors. (Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo,
G.R. No. 189476, 2 February 2011)
Q.

What is the effect if the civil registrar and affected
persons are not impleadedin the petition?

A.

The failure to implead the civil registrar and the
parties who would naturally and legally be affected
by the grant of the petition would render the
proceedings and the judgment void. Non-impleading,
however, as respondent of one who is inadvertently
left out or is not established to be known by the
petitioner to be affected by the grant of the petition
would not nullify the proceedings and judgment as
they are deemed notified through publication.
(Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo, G.R. No. 189476,
2 February 2011)

Q.

B files a petition for cancellation of the birth
certificate of her daughter Ron the ground of the
falsified material entries therein made by B's
husband as the informant. The RTCsets the case
for hearing and directs the publication of the
order once a week for 3 consecutive weeks in a
newspaperof general circulation. Summons was
served on the Civil Registrar but there was no
appearanceduring the hearing.The RTC granted
the petition. R filed a petition for annulment of
judgment before the Court of Appeals,saying that
she was not notified of the petition and hence,the
decision was issued in violation of due process.
B opposed saying that the publication of the
241

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

court order was sufficient compliance with due
process. Rule. (07 Bar Q7a).
A.

The judgment of the RTC should be annulled.
The failure to implead the parties who would
naturally and legally be affected by the grant of the
petition would render the proceedings and the
judgment void. (Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo,
G.R. No. 189476, 2 February 2011)
Here R would naturally and legally be affected
by the grant of the petition since it is her birth
certificate which would be amended. Hence the
judgment against her is null and void since she was
not impleaded and notified.

Q.

Respondent who is an employee of the Bureau of
Customs filed a petition under R108 to correct the
year of his birth from 1952 to 1956. Respondent
impleaded the LCR and the Bureau of Customs in
his petition. The RTC issued an order granting the
petition. Subsequently Respondent filed a request.
with the Civil Service Commission  for the
correction of his birth year in the service record
from 1952 to 1956 attaching the RTC decision. The
CSC denied the request. Was the denial proper?

A.

Yes. The Civil Service Commission an indispensable
party in a R 108 petition to correct Respondent's
year of birth from 1952 to 1956 since that would
affect a government employee's service records.
Here it would mean that the Respondent would
have an additional four years before reaching his
compulsory retirement age. Hence the RTC
decision was null and void for failure to implead an
indispensable party. (Civil Service Commission v.
Rasuman, 17 June 2019, Peralta, J.)
242

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry
Q.

May an opposition be filed against the petition?
If so, by whom and when?

A.

The civil registrar and any person having or claiming
any interest under the entry whose cancellation or
correction is sought may, within 15 days from notice
of the petition, or from the last date of publication of
such notice, file his opposition thereto. (S5 R 108)

Q.

After hearing, what action may the court take on
the petition?

A.

The court may either dismiss the petition or issue an
order granting the cancellation or correction prayed
for. In either case, a certified true copy of the
judgment shall be served upon the civil registrar
concerned who shall annotate the same in his record.

Q.

Helen is the daughter of Eliza, a Filipina, and
Tony, a Chinese, who is married to another
woman living in China. Her birth certificate
indicates that Helen is the legitimate child of
Tony and Eliza and that she is a Chinese citizen.
Helenwants her birth certificatecorrected by
changing her filiation from "legitimate" to
"illegitimate"and her citizenshipfrom "Chinese"to
"Filipino" becauseher parentswere not married.
What petition should Helen file and what
procedural requirements must be observed?
Explain. (05 Bar Q11 ).

A.

Helen should file a petition for correction of entries in
the civil registry under Rule 108 of the Rules of Court.
Under the Law on Special Proceedings a
petition for correction of entries in the civil registry
pursuant to Rule 108 is available to correct entries
243

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

regarding the petitioner's status or filiation and
citizenship or nationality.
The procedural requirements that
observed are the following:

must be

1) The petition should be verified and should
implead the local civil registrar and the parties
who have an interest which would be affected
by the cancellation or correction, in this case,
Helen's parents.
2) The petition should be filed with the RTC of
the place where the correspondingcivil registry
is located.
3) The notice of hearing should be published once
a week for three consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation and personal
notice should be sent to the parents as they
have a known interest which would be affected
by the petition.
Q.

In a petition filed with RTCunder R108and dated
13 February2009,Virgel sought the correction of
entries in his birth certificate as follows: (a) his
gender, from "FEMALE" to "MALE;" (b) his first
name, from "VIRGIE" to "VIRGEL;" and (c) his
month and date of birth from "no entry" to
"FEBRUARY 25, 1976. The RTC granted the
petition. On appeal, the Republic, through the
Office of the Solicitor General(OSG)argued that
the change of Virgel's name from Virgie should
have been made through a proceeding under
R103,and not R108.This argumentwas premised
on the assumption that the summary procedure
under R108 is confined to the correction of
clerical or innocuous errors, which excludes
244

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

one's name or date of birth. Since the petition
lodged with the RTC was not filed pursuant to
R103, the Republic asserted that the trial court
did not acquire jurisdiction over the case. Is the
Republic's argument correct?
A.

No. The Republic incorrectly argued that the petition
for correction under R 108 is limited to changes in
entries containing harmless and innocuous errors.
The cited cases in the petition were already
superseded by much later jurisprudence.
Most importantly, with the enactment of R.A.
No. 904826 in 2001, the local civil registrars, or the
Consul General as the case may be, are now
authorized to correct clerical or typographical errors
in the civil registry, or make changes in the first
name or nickname, without need of a judicial order.
This law provided an administrative recourse for the
correction of clerical or typographical errors,
essentially leaving the substantial corrections in the
civil registry to R108. ~Republic v. Tipay, 14
February 2018, Reyes, J.). 7

Q.

Respondent Julian Edward Emerson Coseteng
Magpayo is the son of Fulvio Magpayo and Anna
Dominique Marquez-Lim Coseteng. Claiming that
his parents were not legally married, Respondent
filed with the RTC of Quezon City (where he
resides) a petition under R103 to change his
name as appearing in the civil registry of Makati
to Julian Edward Emerson Marquez-Lim Coseteng.
In support of his petition, Respondent submitted

27The
correction of the first name from "Virgie" to "Vergel" is actually a
clerical or typographical error which should have been filed with the LCR
pursuant to R.A. No. 9048 (eff. 22 April 2001). This point was not discussed by
the Supreme Court since the Republic failed to raise the objection of lack of
primary jurisdiction.

245

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a certification from the NSO that his mother's
name does not appear in the national indices of
marriage. The RTC granted the petition. The local
civil registrar was not impleaded but copies of the
petition, orders, and the decision were served on
the LCR. Was the grant of the petition proper?
A.

No. The change being sought in Respondent's
petition goes so far as to affect his legal status in
relation to his parents. It has the effect of changing
his status from legitimate to illegitimate. Hence
R108 applies. Under R108 the petition must be filed
in the RTC of the province where the corresponding
civil registry is located which in this case is Makati.
The petition was however filed in Quezon City
where Respondent resides.
Also neither the LCR or the Respondent's
father and mother were impleaded in violation of S3
R108 which requires that the civil registrar and all
persons who have or claim any interest which
would be affected thereby shall be made parties to
the proceeding. The service of a copy of the
petition and its annexes upon the LCR did not cure
the defect. (Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo, G.R.
No. 189476, 2 February 2011, Carpio Morales, J.)

Q.

Dr. Norma Lugsanay Uy filed a petition for
correction of entries under Rule 108 to correct
her name from Anita Sy to Norma Lugsanay, her
status from "legitimate" to "illegitimate" and
her citizenship from "Chinese" to "Filipino."
The order of hearing was duly published. The
LCR was impleaded but the petitioner's parents
and siblings were not. Judgment was rendered
granting the petition. The Republic argued that

246

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

the judgment was null and void for failure to
implead indispensable parties. Is the Republic's
argument correct?
A.

Yes. The petitioner's parents and siblings should have
been impleaded as they would be naturally and
directly affected by the petition. Publication would not
be sufficient notice to them. Since the indispensable
parties were not impleaded, the judgment was void.
(Republic v. Uy, 12 August 2013)

Q.

P filed a petition for changeof namewith the RTC
which the latter granted. The Republic appealed
from the judgment granting the petition by filing a
notice of appeal with the RTC. P moved to
dismiss the Republic's appealon the ground that
a record on appeal is required in appeals in
special proceedings. Should the Republic's
appeal be dismissed?

A.

No. Appeal from the RTC's order granting a petition
for change of name is perfected by filing a notice of
appeal only. A record on appeal is not required
since the case does not involve multiple or
separate appeals where the trial court needs to
retain the original record. (Republic v. Nishina, G.R.
No. 186053, 15 November 2010).

Q.

After the death of her husband Pablo Braza,
Cristina came to know that Lucille Titular was
introducing Patrick Alvin as her and Pablo's son.
Inquiry revealed that the child's birth certificate
states that he was legitimated by subsequent
marriagebetweenPablo and Lucille and the birth
certificate indicates his name as Patrick Alvin
Titular Braza. Contending that Patrick could not
have been legitimated by the supposed marriage
247

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

between Lucille and Pablo, said marriage being
bigamous on account of the then valid and
subsisting marriage between Ma. Cristina and
Pablo, Cristina and her children filed with the
RTC a petition to correct the entries in the birth
record of Patrick. In their petition, they prayed
for (1) the correction of the entries in Patrick's
birth record with respect to his legitimation,the
nameof the father and his acknowledgment,and
the use of the last name "Braza"; 2) a directive
to Leon, Ceciliaand Lucille, all surnamedTitular,
as guardians of the minor Patrick, to submit
Patrick to DNA testing to determinehis paternity
and filiation; and 3) the declaration of nullity of
the legitimation of Patrick as stated in his birth
certificate and, for this purpose, the declaration
of the marriage of Lucille and Pablo as
bigamous. The respondents filed a motion to

dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes. In a special proceeding for correction of entry
under Rule 108 the trial court has no jurisdiction to
nullify marriages and rule on legitimacy and filiation.
Petitioners' insistence that the main cause of action
is for the correction of Patrick's birth records and that
the rest of the prayers are merely incidental thereto
is untenable. The petitioners' cause of action is
actually to seek the declaration of Pablo and
Lucille's marriage as void for being bigamous and
impugn Patrick's legitimacy, which causes of action
are governed not by Rule 108 but by A.M. No. 0211-10-SC which took effect on March 15, 2003, and
Art. 171 of the Family Code, respectively. Hence, the
petition should be filed in a Family Court as

248

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

expressly provided in said Code. (Braza v. City Civil
Registrar of Himamaylan City, 4 December2009).
Q.

Gerbert is a former Filipino who acquired
Canadian citizenship. He went to the Philippines
and married Daisylyn in Pasig City. Due to work
commitments, he had to return to Canada.
Shocked by Daisylyn's affair with another man,
he divorced her in Canada. Later, Gerbert found
another Filipina to love. Desirous of marrying
her, he went to the Pasig City Civil Registry Office
and registered the Canadian divorce decree.
a) Was the recording of the Canadian divorce
decree lawful?

A.

No. While the law requires the entry of the
divorce decree in the civil registry, the law and the
submission of the decree by themselves do not
ipso facto authorize the decree's registration. The
law should be read in relation with the requirement
of a judicial recognition of the foreign judgment
before it can be given res judicata effect. In the
context of the present case, no judicial order as yet
exists recognizing the foreign divorce decree.
Thus, the Pasig 8ity Civil Registry Office acted
without authority of law when it annotated the
Canadian divorce decree on Gerbert and Daisylyn's
marriage certificate, on the strength alone of the
foreign decree presented by Gerbert.
b) Gerbert filed with the RTC of Laoag City a
petition for judicial recognitionof the foreign
divorce decree. The RTC rendered decision
dismissing the petition on the ground that
only the Filipino spouse can invoke the

249

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

provisions of the 2"d paragraph of Article
26 of the Family Code. Was the judge's
decision correct?
A.
No. While the judge was correct in saying that
the 2"d paragraph of Article 26 bestows no rights
upon an alien, that would not lead to the conclusion
that a foreigner cannot file a petition for recognition
of a foreign divorce decree. Direct involvement or
being the subject of the foreign judgment is
sufficient to clothe a party with the requisite interest
to institute an action before our courts for the
recognition of the foreign judgment. In a divorce
situation the divorce obtained by an alien abroad
may be recognized in the Philippines, provided the
divorce is valid according to his or her national law

c) Assuming that the RTC renders a decision
recognizing the Canadian divorce decree,
would that by itself already authorize the
cancellation of entry in the Civil Registry?
A.
No. The recognition that an RTC may extend
to the foreign divorce decree does not, by itself,
authorize the cancellation of the entry in the civil
registry. A petition for recognition of a foreign
judgment is not the proper proceeding for the
cancellation of entries in the civil registry. The
proper proceeding is that provided for in R108.
Rule 108 of the Rules of Court sets in detail the
jurisdictional and procedural requirements that must
be complied with before a judgment, authorizing the

250

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

cancellation or correction, may be annotated in the
civil registry.28
d) It is required that two separate proceedings for
the registration of the Canadian divorce decree
- - one for recognition of the foreign decree and
another specifically for cancellation of entry
under R108 -- be brought?

A.
No. The recognition of the foreign divorce
decree may be made in a R108 proceeding itself, as
the object of special proceedings is precisely to
establish the status or right of a party or a particular
fact. Moreover, R108 can serve as the appropriate
adversarial proceeding by which the applicability of
the foreign judgment can be measured and tested in
terms of jurisdictional infirmities, want of notice to the
party, collusion, fraud, or clear mistake of law or fact.
(Corpuz v. Sta. Tomas, 11 August 2010, Brion, J.).
Q.

Ted, married to Annie, went to Canada to work.
Five years later, Ted became a naturalized
Canadian citizen. He returned to the Philippines
to convince Annie to settle in Canada.
Unfortunately, Ted discovered that Annie and his
friend Louie were having an affair. Deeply hurt,
Ted returned to Canada and filed a petition for
divorce which was granted. In December 2013,
Ted decided to marry his childhood friend
Corazon in the Philippines. In preparation for the
wedding, Ted went to the Local Civil Registry of
Quezon City where his marriage contract with

28Although
not explicitly stated in the decision, the recording of the divorce
decree would in effect result in the cancellation of the entry in the civil registry
regarding the marriage between Gerbert and Daisylyn.

251

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Annie was registered. He asked the Civil
Registerto annotatethe decreeof divorce on his
marriage contract with Annie. However, he was
advised by the NationalStatistics Office (NSO)to
file a petition for judicial recognition of the
decreeof divorce in the Philippines.
Is it necessary for Ted to file a petition for
judicial recognition of the decree of divorce he
obtained in Canada before he can contract a
second marriage in the Philippines? (14 Civil
Bar Q24).
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court has held that before a
foreign divorce decree dissolving a marriage
contracted in the Philippines can be given effect, a
petition for judicial recognition of the foreign divorce
decree should be first filed. (Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas,
11 August 2010). Hence a court judgment
recognizing the Canadian
divorce decree is
necessary in order to give effect to the decree
dissolving the marriage between Ted and Annie
and to allow Ted to contract a second marriage in
the Philippines.

Q.

Hades, an American citizen, through a dating
website, got acquainted with Persephone, a
Filipina. Hades came to the Philippines and
proceeded to Baguio City where Persephone
resides. Hades and Persephone contracted
marriage, solemnized by the Metropolitan Trial
Court judge of Makati City. After the wedding,
Hades flew back to California, United States of
America, to wind up his business affairs. On his
return to the Philippines, Hadesdiscovered that
Persephone had an illicit affair with Phanes.
Immediately, Hades returned to the United
252

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

States and was able to obtain a valid divorce
decree from the Superior Court of the County of
San Mateo, California, a court of competent
jurisdiction against Persephone. Hades desires
to marry Hestia, also a Filipina, whom he met at
Baccus Grill in Pasay City.
a) As Hades'lawyer,what petition should you file
in order that your client can avoid prosecution
for bigamy if he desires to marry Hestia?
b) In what court should you file the petition?
c) xxx (15 Bar Q9).
A.

a) As Hade's lawyer, I would file a petition
for cancellation of entry of marriage under Rule
108 with prayer for recognition of foreign
divorce judgment.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that a foreign divorce decree must first
be recognized before it can be given effect. The
Supreme Court stated that the recognition may be
prayed for in the petition for cancellation of the
marriage entry under Rule 108. ( Corpuz v. Sta.
Tomas, 628 SCRA 266).
b) I would file the petition in the regional trial court
of Makati City, where the corresponding civil
registry is located. (Section 1 of Rule 108).
Q.

Petitioner Fujiki is a Japanese national who
married respondent Maria Paz Marinay in the
Philippines in 2004.The marriage did not sit well
with petitioner's parents. Thus, Fujiki could not
bring his wife to Japan where he resides.

253

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Eventually, they lost contact with each other. In
2008, Marinay met another Japanese, Maekara.
Without the first marriage being dissolved,
Marinay and Maekara were married in 2008 in
Quezon City, Philippines. Maekara brought
Marinay to Japan. However, Marinay allegedly
suffered physical abuse from Maekara. She left
Maekaraand started to contact Fujiki. Fujiki and
Marinay met in Japan and they were able to
reestablish their relationship. In 2010, Fujiki
helped Marinay obtain a judgment from a family
court in Japan which declared the marriage
betweenMarinayand Maekaravoid on the ground
of bigamy. In 2011, Fujiki filed a petition in the
RTCof PasayCity entitled: "Judicial Recognition
of Foreign Judgment (or Decree of Absolute
Nullity of Marriage)." Fujiki prayed that (1) the
Japanese Family Court judgment be recognized;
(2) that the bigamous marriage between Marinay
and Maekarabe declaredvoid ab initio; and (3) for
the RTC to direct the LCR of Quezon City to
annotatethe JapaneseFamily Court judgment on
the Certificate of Marriage between Marinay and
Maekaraand to endorse such annotation to the
Office of the Administrator and Civil Registrar
Generalin the NSO.
A few days after the filing of the petition, the
RTC immediatelyissued an Order dismissing the
petition based on Braza v. The City Civil Registrar
of Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental _ (607
SCRA638 [2009])whereinthe SC ruled that "[i]n a
special proceeding for correction of entry under
Rule 108, the trial court has no jurisdiction to
nullify marriages x x x." Was the Pasay City
RTC'sdismissal of the petition correct?
254

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

A.

Since the recognition of a foreign judgment only
requires proof of fact of the judgment, it may be
made in a special proceeding for cancellation or
correction of entries in the civil registry under Rule
108 of the Rules of Court. In Corpuz v. Sta. Tomas
(628 SCRA 266 [201 O]) this Court declared that
"[t]he recognition of the foreign divorce decree may
be made in a R 108 proceeding itself, as the object
of special proceedings (such as that in Rule 108 of
the Rules of Court) is precisely to establish the
status or right of a party or a particularfact."
Braza is not applicable because Braza does not
involve the recognition of a foreign judgment
nullifying a bigamous marriage where one of the
parties is a citizen of the foreign country.To be sure,
a petition for correction or cancellationof an entry in
the civil registry cannot substitute for an action to
invalidatea marriage. A direct action is necessary to
prevent circumvention of the substantive and
proceduralsafeguards of marriage under the. Family
Code, However,this rule does not apply in a petition
for correction or cancellation of a civil registry entry
based on the recognition of a foreign judgment
annulling a marriage where one of the parties is a
citizen of the foreign country. There is no
circumvention of the substantive and procedural
safeguards of marriage under Philippine law. A
recognitionof a foreign judgment is not an action to
nullify a marriage. It is an action for Philippinecourts
to recognize the effectivity of a foreign judgment,
which presupposes a case which was already
tried and decided under foreign law. (Fujiki v.
Marinay, 20 June 2013).

255

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Merlyn requested from the NSO a CENOMAR
(Certificate of No Marriage)for the purpose of
marrying her boyfriend of 5 years. To her shock,
she discovered that per records she had been
married to a certain Ye Son Sune, a Korean
National, in a wedding celebratedat the MTCCin
Cebu City. Merlyn thus filed a petition under
Rule 108 for cancellation of entries in the
marriage contract, especially in the wife portion
thereof. During the trial, it was proved that
Merlyn never knew Ye nor did she appearbefore
any marriageceremonyat the MTCCand that her
purported signatures in the marriage contract
were forged. The trial court granted Marlyn's
petition. On appeal,the Republic argued that the
cancellation of the entries in the marriage
contract was in effect a nullification of _the------- marriage which could only have been. done in a
petition for declarationof nullity of marriage.The
Republic thus prayed that the trial court's
decision be set aside. Should the Republic's
appeal be granted?

A.

No, the Republic's appeal should not be granted.
R108 may be availed of to cancel entries in a
fake marriage contract. Here another person had
posed as the petitioner and contracted a marriage
with a Korean. There is no need to file a petition for
declaration of nullity of marriage with the Family Court
since there was no marriage to speak of in the first
place. (Republic v. 0/aybar, 10 February 2014).29

29

Asked in 2014 Remedial Law Bar Examination.

256

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

Sex-change cases
Q.

Petitioner Rommel Jacinto Dantes Silverio filed
with the RTCof Manila a petition for the change
of his first name and sex in his birth certificate.
The Petition alleges that Petitioner is a male
transsexual, that is "anatomically male but
feels, thinks, and acts as a female," and that the
Petitioner's efforts to transform himself into a
female culminated with a "sex reassignment
surgery" in Thailand. Should the petition
be granted?

A.

No. The Petitioner'sbasis for changing his name was
his change of sex. Consideringthat there is no law
recognizing sex reassignment, the determination of
a person's sex made at the time of his or her birth, if
not attended by error, is immutable. Hence the
petition to change his sex, and correlatively his
name, must fail for lack of legal basis.
On a procedural note, the Supreme Court
stated that the petition insofar as it relates to the
change of first name should have been filed with
the LCR which has primary jurisdiction pursuant to
R.A. No. 9048. (Silverio v. Republic, G.R. No.
174689, 22 October 2007).

Q.

Respondentwas born in 1981 and registered a
female in her birth certificate. While growing up
she developed secondary male characteristics
and was diagnosed to have congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH) which is a condition where
persons thus afflicted possess both female and
male characteristics. At 13 years of age, tests
revealed that her ovarian structures had

257

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

minimized, she had stopped growing, and she
has no breast or menstrual development.
In 2003 Respondent filed a petition for
correction of entries in the birth certificatewith
the RTC of Siniloan, Laguna. She prayed that
her birth certificate be corrected such that her
gender be changed from female to male and her
first name be changed from Jennifer to Jeff.
The RTC granted Respondent's petition. On
appeal the Republic contends that the petition
did not comply with R103 and R108. The
Republic contends that the LCR, who is an
indispensable party under 53 R108 was not
impleaded, and that CAH was not a valid ground
for change of sex. Should the RTC's decision be
set aside?
A.

No, the RTC's decision should not be set aside.
S6 R1 provides that the Rules of Court shall be
liberally construed in order to promote their
objective of securing a just, inexpensive, and
speedy disposition of every action and proceeding.
There was substantial compliance with S3 R 108
when petitioner furnished a copy of the petition to
the local civil registrar.
Where a person is biologically or naturally
intersex, the determining factor in his gender
classification is what the individual, upon reaching
the age of majority, with good reason thinks of his
or her sex.
Considering that the Respondent's change of
name from Jennifer to Jeff merely recognizes his
preffered gender, such should be granted. Such
change will conform to the change of the entry in birth
258

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

certificate from female to male. (Republic v.
Cagandahan, G.R. No. 166676,12 September2008).
Note: The SC did not tackle the Republic's
argument that the petition was fatally defective
since it did not allege that the Respondent was a
bona fide resident for 3 years of the place where
the petition was filed prior to its filing. This omission
may be justified by the fact that the principal
proceeding was for change of entry [sex] with the
change of name simply being an incident or a
logical consequence of the change of sex. Hence
the procedural infirmity, which relates to R103
rather than R108, may be overlooked in the interest
of substantial justice.
Q.

May a petition for change of name and
correction of entries in the civil registry be
joinedin one proceeding?

A.

It is submitted that a petition for change of name and
correction of entry may be joined in one proceeding
if the change of name and correction of entry are
based on the same underlying facts or logically
connected to each other and provided that all the
requirements of R108 and R108 are complied with.
(Republic v. Belmonte, G.R. No. L-32600, 26
February 1988). Thus in Republic v. Cagandahan,
supra, the Supreme Court upheld the propriety of a
petition which asks for the change of sex from
female to male and the change of name from
Jennifer to Jeff.
As to the venue, it is submitted that venue
should follow that for the principal proceeding.
Thus in Cagandahan the principal proceeding is the
change of sex (the change of name being merely
259

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

incidental); hence the venue should be with the
RTC of the place where the corresponding civil
registry is located.
If however there is no factual or legal
connection between the change of name and the
correction of entry, it is submitted that the two
reliefs cannot be granted in one proceeding. Unlike
causes of actions in civil actions which may be
joined under 85 R2, change of name and correction
of entry cannot be similarly joined since there is a
public interest involved and the procedural
safeguards designed for R103 and R108 would be
undermined. (Republic v. Belmonte, supra).
Q.

Kris Anne Dela Vega Vergara filed with the RTC
of Pasig City a "Petition for Correction of the
Entries in the Certificate of Live Birth" seeking
the correction of her name from "Ronald" to
"Kris Anne" and her sex from "Male" to
"Female." The notice of hearing was posted and
published in a newspaper of general circulation
and notices were sent to the OSG, the Civil
Registrar-General and the Local Civil Registrar
of Pasig City. No opposition was filed. The OSG 
did not oppose the petition and the motion to
present petitioner's evidence ex parte.
The RTC granted the petition. The Republic
through the OSG filed an appeal to the CA
where it raised for the first time the objection
that the RTC did not acquire jurisdiction over
the proceedings since the title of the petition
did not contain petitioner's aliases as required
by R103. May the RTC decision be set aside on
the ground that it did not acquire jurisdiction
over the petition?

260

J9JC9B0M

Rule 108
Cancellation Or Correction Of
Entries In The Civil Registry

A

No. The Supreme Court held that it is R 108 and not
R103 which is applicable since petitioner simply
wanted to correct the clerical fault or error in the entry
of her sex and name and notto change her name.
The Supreme Court also held that even if
R103 were applicable, it could not be denied that
the petitioner had complied with the requirements
for an adversarial proceeding before the RTC. The
publication and posting of the notice of hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation and the notices
sent to the OSG, the Civil Registrar-General and
the Local Civil Registrar of Pasig City are sufficient
indicia of an adverse proceeding. The fact that no
one opposed the petition, including the OSG, did
not deprive the court of its jurisdiction to hear the
same and did not make the proceedings less
adversarial in nature. Considering that the OSG did
not oppose the petition and the motion to present
evidence ex parte when it had the opportunity to do
so, it cannot now complain that the proceedings in
the lower court were defective. (Republic v. Dela
Vega Vergara, [Res.], G.R. No. 195873, 23
February 2015).

261

J9JC9B0M

R.A. NO. 904830 as amended by R.A. No. 10172
(ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGE OF FIRST
NAME OR NICKNAME AND CORRECTION
OF CLERICAL/TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS)
Q.

May an entry in a civil register be changed or
correctedwithout a judicial order?

A.

As a general rule no, except for:
1) Clerical or typographical errors, and
2) Change of first name or nickname,
3) Change of the day and month in the date of
birth or sex of a person where it is patently
clear that there was a clerical or typographical
error or mistake in the entry.
The foregoing can be corrected or changed by
the concerned city or municipal civil registrar (LCR)
or consul general (CG).

Q.

What is a clerical or typographicalerror?

A.

A clerical or a typographical error refers to a
mistake committed in the performance of clerical
work in writing, copying, transcribing or typing an
entry in the civil register that is harmless and
innocuous, such as misspelled name or misspelled
place of birth, mistake in the entry of day and
month in the date of birth or the sex of the person
or the like, which is visible to the eyes or obvious to
the understanding, and can be corrected or
changed only by reference to other existing record
R.A.

30

No. 9048 took effect on 22 April 2001 (Republic v. Sali, 3 April
2017), while R.A. No. 10172 took effect on 3 September 2012.

262

J9JC9B0M

Administrative Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/Typographical Errors

or records; provided, however,that no correction
must involve the change of nationality, age, or
status (SAN) of the petitioner. (S2[3], RA 9048).
Q.

On 13 May 2010, RespondentMichelle Soriano
Gallo filed with the RTCa petition for correction
of entry in her birth certificate under Rule 108.
Gallo has never been known as "Michael
Soriano Gallo." She has always been female.
Her parents, married on May 23, 1981, have
never changed their names. For her, in her
petition before the Regional Trial Court, her
Certificate of Live Birth contained errors, which
should be corrected. For her, she was not
changing the name that was given to her; she
was merely correcting its entry.
To accurately reflect these facts in her
documents, Gallo prayed before the Regional
Trial Court of Ilagan City, lsabela in Special
Proc. No. 21555for the correction of her name
from "Michael" to "Michelle" and of her
biological sex from "Male" to "Female" under
Rule 108of the Rulesof Court.
In addition, Gallo asked for the inclusion of
her middle name, "Soriano," her mother's
middle name "Angangan," her father's middle
name, "Balingao"; and her parent's marriage
date, May 23, 1981, in her Certificate of Live
Birth, as these were not recorded.
The RTC rendered a decision granting the
petition. On appeal, the Republic argued that
the applicable rule should be Rule 103 for
Petitions for Change of Name. It also argued
that Gallo did not comply with the jurisdictional
263

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

requirements under Rule 103 because the title
of her Petition and the published Order did
not state her official name, "Michael Gallo."
Furthermore, the published Order was also
defective for not stating the cause of the
change of name. The Republic also argued that
Respondent failed to exhaust administrative
remedies and to observe the doctrine of primary
jurisdictionas the petition should have been
filed with the LCR pursuantto R.A. 9048.
A.

Assuming that R.A. 9048 has not yet been enacted,
the applicable rule would not be R103 but R108.
The entry of "Michelle" as "Michael" is merely a
clerical or typographical error.
However at the time Respondent filed her
petition, R.A. No. 9048 had already taken effect on
22 April 2001. Hence under the doctrine of primary
jurisdiction, Respondent should have filed her
petition with the LCR as it merely involves clerical
31
or typographical errors. Likewise, the prayers to
enter Gallo's middle name as Soriano, the middle
names of her parents as Angangan for her mother
and Balingao for her father, and the date of her
parents' marriage as 23 May 1981 fall under clerical
or typographical errors as mentioned in Republic
Act No. 9048, since these corrections may be done
by referring to existing records in the civil register.
None of it involves any change in Gallo's
nationality, age, status, or sex.
Nevertheless the government was estopped
from raising this ground since it raised for the first
time only before the Supreme Court. The Supreme
31

The Court said however that the Petition for change of sex was correctly filed

with the RTC since RA No. 10172 (eff. 3 September 2012) was not yet in force.

264

J9JC9B0M

Administrative Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/TypographicalErrors
Court thus affirmed the RTC's decision. (Republic
v. Gallo, 17 January 2018, Leanen, J.).
Q.

Who may file the petition for change
correction and where shall it be filed?

A.

Any person having direct and personal interest in
the correction of a clerical or typographical error in
an entry and/or change of first name or nickname in
the civil register may file, in person, a verified
petition with the local civil registry where the record
being sought to be corrected or changed is kept.
(S3 RA 9048).

Q.

What if the petitioner has already migrated to
another place in the country and it would not be
practical for such
party, in terms
of
transportationexpenses, time and effort (TET) to
appear in person before the local civil registrar
(LCR) keeping the documents to be corrected or
changed? Where may he file the petition?

A.

In such a case, the petition may be filed, in person,
with the LCR of the place where the interested
party is presently residing or domiciled. The two
LCRs concerned will then coordinate to facilitate
the processing of the petition. (S3).

Q.

How about Filipino citizens who are presently
residing or domiciled in foreign countries?
Where may they file their petition?

A.

They may file their petition, in person, with the
nearest Philippine Consulate. (S3). It appears that
former Filipinos presently residing or domiciled
abroad cannot avail of this provision.

265

or

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the requirements for correction of
erroneous entry concerning the day and month
of the birth date or the sex of a person?

A.

No petition for correction of erroneous entry
concerning the birth date or the sex of a person
shall be entertained except if the petition is
accompanied by earliest school record or earliest
school documents such as, but not limited to,
medical records, baptismal certificate and other
documents issued by religious authorities; nor shall
any entry involving change of gender be corrected
except if the petition is accompanied by a
certification issued by an accredited government
physician attesting to the fact that the petitioner has
not undergone sex change or sex transplant. The
petition for change of first name or nickname, or for
correction of erroneous entry concerning the day
and month in the date of birth or the sex of a
person, as the case may be, shall be published at
least once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation.

Q.

In 2009, petitioner filed with the RTC a petition
under R108 to correct a clerical or typographical
error in his sex, which was indicated in his birth
certificate as "female." He presented a medical
certificate by a government physician that he was
"phenotypically male." The RTC granted the
petition. On appeal, the Republic contends that
the Medical Certificate failed to include a
certificationthat respondent "has not undergone
sex change or sex transplant" as required
by Section 5 of RA 9048. Is the Republic's
contention correct?

266

J9JC9B0M

Administrative. Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/Typographical Errors

A.

No. "Phenotypically
male" means conceived and
born male.Hence it no longer requires a certification
that petitioner "has not undergone sex change or
sex transplant." (Republic v. Unabia, 11 February

2019, Del Castillo, J.).
The court justified the application of RA 9048,
as amended by RA 10172, in the RTC case as
follows:
When Special Proceeding No. 2009-018 was
filed in 2009, the governing law then was the original,
unamended RA 9048. There was no provision then
for the administrative correction or change of clerical
or typographical errors or mistakes in the civil registry
entries of the sex of individuals, but only clerical or
typographical errors and change of first names or
nicknames. Administrative corrections or changes
relating to the sex of individuals was authorized only
with the passage in 2012 of RA 10172. Even then, the
amendments under RA 10172 should still apply, the
Jaw being remedial in nature. Moreover, under
Section 11 of RA 9048, retroactive application is
allowed "insofar as it does not prejudice or impair
vested or acquired rights in accordance with the Civil
Code and other laws."
Q.

How many times may petitionsfor the correction
of clerical or typographicalerrors and/or change
of first name or nickname be availed of?

A.

Only once. (83). Hence if a person has availed of a
petition for correction of clerical or typographical
error under R.A. No. 9048 and he wants to correct
another clerical or typographical error, he should
file a petition with the RTC under R 108.

267

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

However if a person has filed a petition for
correction of clerical or typographical errors, he can
still avail of a petition for change of first name or
nickname, and vice versa.
Q.

Which court or body would have jurisdictionover
a petition for change of first name or nickname or
for correctionof clerical or typographical errors?

A.

Primary jurisdiction would be with the Local Civil
Registrar or the Consul General. However in case
where the petition has been denied by the LCR or
CG or where the petitioner is availing for the
second time of the remedy, then jurisdiction is with
the RTC. ( Silverio v. Republic, G.R. No. 174689, 22
October 2007; S3 & 7, RA 9048).

Change of first name or nickname
Q.

What are the grounds for change of first name
or nickname?

A.

The petition for change of first name or nickname may
be allowed in any of the following cases: (DR DHC)
(1) The first name or nickname is ridiculous, tainted
with dishonor or extremely difficult to write or
pronounce;
(2) The new first name or nickname has been
habitually and continuously used by the
petitioner and he has been publicly known by
that first name or nickname in the community; or
(3) The change will avoid confusion.
The grounds are exclusive. See S7(3) RA 9048.

268

J9JC9B0M

Administrative Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/Typographical Errors

Q.

Is publication a requirement in a petition for
change of first name or nickname?

A.

Yes publication is required. The petition shall be
published at least once a week for 2 consecutive
weeks (1x2) in a newspaper of general circulation.
Publication is not required in a petition for
correction of clerical or typographical errors, except
where the erroneous entry is of the date and month
of the birth date or of the sex of a person.

Q.

What is the remedy of a petitioner if his petition
is denied by the LCR or the consul general?

A.

He may either appeal the decision to the civil
registrar general or file the appropriate petition with
the proper court. (S?). Under the Rules of the CRG,
the petitioner should file a notice of appeal within
10 working days from notice.

Q.

A man goes by the name of Jennifer Reynes,
which name he has been using and by which he
has been known since childhood. Recently,he
checked his birth certificate and discovered the
following: (a) His surname was indicated as
"Reyes" rather than "Reynes." (b) His sex was
indicated as "Female" rather than "Male."
Jennifer goes to you and wants to correct the
foregoing entries. He also wants to change his
first namefrom "Jennifer" to "Jefferson" because
he is often confused for a female and many
peopleteasehim about his femininefirst name.
(A) What remedy/remedies would you advise
Jennifer Reyes to avail of? Explain the
reasonfor availing of such remedy/remedies.

269

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(B) Is publication a
remedy/remedies?

requirement

for such

A.
(A)
(a) For changing "Reyes" to "Reynes", I would
advise Jennifer Reynes to avail of an
administrative petition for correction of clerical
or typographical with the local civil registrar
under R.A. No. 9048.
Under R.A. No. 9048, a petition for correction of
clerical or typographical error may be filed with the
LCR. A clerical or typographical error is one which is
visible to the eyes or obvious to the understanding.
Here the error is visible to the eyes or obvious
to the understanding since it involves the deletion
of only one letter from the surname. Hence a
petition for correction may be filed with the LCR.
(b) For changing the entry on his sex from "female"
to "male," I would advise Jennifer to file a
petition for change of entry of sex with the LCR
pursuant to R.A. No. 9048.
Under R.A. No. 9048, the entry of sex may be
changed where it is patently clear that there was a
mistake in the entry.
Here it is patently clear that there was a
mistake in the entry of Jennifer's sex. Hence an
administrative petition for change of entry of sex
may be availed of.

270

J9JC9B0M

Administrative Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/Typographical Errors

For changing the name "Jennifer'' to "Jefferson,"
I would advise Jennifer Reynes to file a petition for
change of first name with the LCR.
Under R.A. No. 9048, a petition for change of
first name may be availed of if the change will avoid
confusion.
Here the change will avoid confusion as to the
sex of Jennifer Reynes. Hence I would advise
Jennifer to file a petition for change of first name
with the LCR.
(B)
Publication would be required in the petition to
change first name and in the petition to change
entry of sex pursuant to R.A. No. 9048.
Publication would not be required in the
petition to correct "Reyes" to "Reynes" since it is a
simple typographical error not involving sex or day
or month of birth under R.A. No. 9048.
Q.

Dr. Norma Lugsanay Uy filed a petition for
correction of entries under R108 to correct her
name from Anita Sy to Norma Lugsanay, her
status from "legitimate" to "illegitimate" and
her citizenship from "Chinese" to "Filipino."
The order of hearing was duly published. The
LCR was impleaded but the petitioner's parents
and siblings were not. Judgment was rendered
granting the petition. The Republic argued that
the judgment was null and void for failure to
implead indispensable parties. Is the Republic's
argument correct?

271

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes. The petitioner's parents and siblings should have
been impleaded as they would be naturally and
directly affected by the petition. Publication would not
be sufficient notice to them. Since the indispensable
parties were not impleaded, the judgment was void.
(Republic v. Uy, 12 August 2013)

Q.

Can a petition be filed under R108 to correct the
erroneous entry in birth certificate that petitioner's
parents were married?

A.

Yes. Even substantial errors in a civil registry may be
corrected and the true facts established under R108
provided the parties aggrieved by the error avail
themselves of the appropriate adversary proceeding.
A petition seeking a substantial correction of an entry
in a civil register must implead as parties to the
proceedings not only the local civil registrar, as
petitioner did in the dismissed petition for correction of
entries, but also all persons who have or claim any
interest which would be affected by the correction.
This is required by S3, R108. Thus, in his new
petition, petitioner should at least implead his father
and mother as parties since the substantial correction
he is seeking will also affect them. (Onde v. Local
Civil Registrar, 10 September 2014).

Q.

Distinguishbetween change of name under R.A.
No. 9048 and under R103.

A.
RA 9048

R103

Change of first name or
nickname only

Change of name (including
first name or nickname but
primary jurisdiction with
LCR/CG)

272

J9JC9B0M

Administrative Change Of First Name Or Nickname
And Correction Of Clerical/Typographical Errors

Filed with LCR where record
kept; if migrant, with LCR of
residence or domicile; if
Filipino citizen residing or
domiciled abroad, with the
nearest Phil. Consulate

Filed with RTC where
petitioner resides

Publication 1 x 2

Publication 1 x 3

Grounds for change of name
are exclusive

Grounds for change of name
are not exclusive

Appeal to the CRG within 10
working days from notice

Appeal to the CA within 15
days from notice

Q.

Distinguish between correction of entries under
R.A. No. 9048 and under R108.

A.
RA 9048

R108

Correction of clerical or
typographical errors only
(excluding SAN)

Filed with LCR where record
kept; if migrant, with LCR of
residence or domicile; if
Filipino citizen residing or
domiciled abroad, with the
nearest Phil. Consulate
No publication except if
correction of erroneous entry
of day and month of birth
date or sex in which case
publication 1 x 2
Appeal to the CRG within 10
working days from notice
273

Correction of substantial
errors (and clerical or
typographical errors but
primary jurisdiction with
LCR/CG)
Filed with RTC where
corresponding civil registry is
kept

Publication 1 x 3

Appeal to the CA within 15
days from notice

J9JC9B0M

RULE107.ABSENTEES
Q.

What is the purpose of R107?

A.

The primordial purpose of R107 is to provide for an
administrator of the property of the absentee. The
general interest of society may require that property
does not remain abandoned without someone
representing it and without an owner. (Reyes v.
Alejandro, G.R. No. L-32026, 16 January 1986).

Q.

Which court has subject-matter
over petitions under R107?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 19(7) of B.P. Big. 129.

Q.

When may the petition for appointment of a
representative for an absentee under R107 be
filed? Where may the petition be filed?

A.

When a person disappears from his domicile, his
whereabouts being unknown, and without having
left an agent to administer his property, or the
power conferred upon the agent has expired, any
interested party, relative, or friend may petition the
RTC of the place where the absentee resided
before his disappearance for the appointment of a
person to represent him provisionally in all that may
be necessary. (S1 R107).

Q.

When may the petition for declaration of absence
and appointment of a trustee or administrator
be filed?

A.

After the lapse of 2 years from a person's
disappearance and without any news about the
absentee or since the receipt of the last news, or of
5 years (Nile) in case the absentee has left a
274

jurisdiction

J9JC9B0M

Rule 107
Absentees

person in charge of the administration of his
property, the declaration of his absence and the
appointment of a trustee or administrator may be
applied for by any of the following:
(a) The spouse present;.
(b) The heirs instituted in a will, who may present
an authentic copy of the same;
(c) The intestate heirs; and
(d) Those who have over the property of the
absentee some right subordinated to the
condition of his death.
Q.

In a petition filed in 1969, Erlinda prayed for the
declaration of the absence of her husband
Roberto alleging that her husband had been
absent from their conjugal dwelling since 1962
and since then had not been heard from nor his
whereabouts known. The petition further alleged
that her husband left no will nor any property in
his name nor any debts. After hearing the Court a
quo dismissed the petition on the ground that
since Roberto left no property there was no
necessity to declare him judicially an absentee.
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

Yes. The primordial purpose of R107 is to provide
for an administrator of the property of the
absentee. The general interest of society may
require that property does not remain abandoned
without someone representing it and without an
owner. Since Roberto has no property, there is no
point in declaring him an absentee. (Reyes v.
Alejandro, G.R. No.L-32026, 16 January 1986).

275

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Note: If the purpose of the spouse present is
to contract a subsequent marriage, the proper
remedy is the institution of a summary judicial
proceeding for the declaration of presumptive death
of the absentee spouse pursuant to Articles 41 and
253 of the Family Code. Note that the judgment of
the court therein shall be final and executory
pursuant to Article 247.

276

J9JC9B0M

RULE109.APPEALSIN
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Q.

What are the orders or judgments in special
proceedings from which an appeal may be taken?

A.

An appeal may be taken from an order or judgment:
(HACAFF)
(a) Allows or disallows a will.
(b) Determines who are the lawful heirs or the
distributive share of the estate to which such
heir is entitled.
(c) Allows or disallows any claim against the estate
or any claim presented on behalf of the estate
to offset a claim against it.
(d) Settles the account of an executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian (GATE).
(e) Constitutes in estate proceedings or those
relating to the administration of a trustee or a
guardian (GET), a final determination in the lower
court of the rights (fdr) of the party appealing.
(f) Which is the final order or judgment rendered in
the case, and affects the substantial rights of
the person appealing (foasra). (S1 R109).

Q.

After the death of Beatriz Silverio, her surviving
spouse, Ricardo Silverio, Sr., filed an intestate
proceeding for the settlement of her estate.
Ricardo was appointed administrator. Shortly
thereafter the RTC issued an order directing Nelia
Silverio-Dee to vacate the premises of the estate
property located at Forbes Park, Makati City. Nelia

277

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

filed a motion for reconsideration but this was
denied by the RTC.SubsequentlyNelia appealed
the order by filing a notice of appeal and a record
on appeal.Should the appealbe allowed?
A.

No. The order of the intestate court for Nelly to
vacate a portion of the estate property is only an
interlocutory order that may not be the subject of an
appeal. It is not a final determination of the case or
of the issue of distribution of the shares of the heirs
in the estate or their rights therein. It must be borne
in mind that until the estate is partitioned, each heir
only has an inchoate right to the properties of the
estate, such that no heir may lay claim on a
particular property. ( Silverio v. Court of Appeals,
G. R. No. 178933, 16 September 2009).

Q.

The decedent was survived by his widow and
his five children (respondent heirs).
Believing that the decedent died intestate,
the respondent heirs filed a petition with the RTC
for the settlement of the decedent's estate. The
case was raffled to Branch 254 and docketed as
Sp. Proc. Case No. SP-03-0060(Intestate Case).
Subsequently, Iris Morales filed a separate
petition with the RTC alleging that the decedent
left a will. Morales prayed for the probate of the
will. Her petition was raffled also to Branch 254
and docketed as Sp. Proc. Case No. SP-03-0069
(Testate Case). Morales filed a manifestation in
the Testate Case and moved to suspend the
intestate proceedings in order to give way to the
probate proceedings in the Testate Case. The
respondent heirs opposed Morales' motion for

278

J9JC9B0M

Rule 109
Appeals In Special Proceedings

suspensionand her petition for allowanceof the
will. The RTC consolidated the Intestate Case
with the TestateCase.
The RTC issued an order suspending the
intestate proceedings and setting the case for
probate. The RTC reasoned that probate
proceedings take precedence over intestate
proceedings. Two months later the respondent
heirs moved for reconsideration of the order.
The respondent heirs argued that the will was
void because of preterition. The RTC granted
the motion, set aside the order setting the case
for probate, and ordered the case to proceed in
intestacy. Morales moved for reconsideration
which the RTC denied. Morales filed a petition
for certiorari against the orders of the RTC.
Morales maintains that the RTC committed
grave abuse of discretion when it ordered the
case to proceed intestate because the order
setting the case for probate already attained
finality since there was no appeal therefrom
within 30 days from notice. Is Moralescorrect?
A.

No. There is no merit in Morales' argument that the
previous order setting the case for probate attained
finality. The disputed order is merely interlocutory
and can be modified or rescinded even after 30
days from notice. (Morales v. 0/ondriz, 3 February
2016, Brion, J.).32

32Compare
an order setting the case for probate with an order probating or
allowing a will which is an order that would become final if not appealed within
30 days from notice. (S1 R75, S1[a) R109).

279

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

In estate proceedings, may the court pending
a controversy or appeal, allow an advance
distribution?

A.

Yes the court may in its discretion and upon proper
and just terms, allow advance distribution subject to
the following requirements: (NP)
1) Advance distribution shall pertain only to such
part of the estate as may not be affected by the
controversy or appeal.
2) The debts, funeral charges,
administration
expenses, and estate taxes must first have been
paid, unless the distributees or any of them give a
bond to secure such payment. (S2 R109).

Q.

Is the probate court's order denying a motion
for advance distributionappealable?

A.

No. Such order is merely interlocutory and thus not
appealable. (Ignacio v. Reyes, 12 July 2017).

280

J9JC9B0M

CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

J9JC9B0M

PRELIMINARIES
Q.

Distinguish jurisdiction over the subject matter
in criminal cases from jurisdiction over the
person of the accused.

A.

Jurisdiction over the subject matter in criminal
cases is the power of a court to try a particular
class of criminal offenses as defined by the
legislature while jurisdiction over the person of the
accused is the power of a court to try a case with
binding effect as against an accused. Jurisdiction
over the subject matter is conferred by law while
jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
obtained by the arrest of the accused or his
voluntary surrender or appearance in court.
Jurisdiction over the subject matter in criminal
cases is also known as jurisdiction over the offense.

Q.

What are the requisites for the exercise
criminal jurisdiction?

A.

The requisites for the exercise of criminal
jurisdiction are the following: (a) the court must
have jurisdiction over the offense and (b) it must
have jurisdiction over the person of the accused.

Q.

How does a court acquire jurisdiction over the
person of the accused?

A.

Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
acquired either by his arrest or by his voluntary
appearance in court. The voluntary appearance of
the accused may be made by the filing of a
pleading or motion in court. However if the motion
to quash was precisely and exclusively to challenge
the jurisdiction of the court over the accused's

282

of

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

person under S3(b) R117, the accused is not
deemed to have made a voluntary appearance.
Q.

Jose, Alberto, and Romeo were charged with
murder. Upon filing of the information,the RTC
judge issued the warrants for their arrest.
Learning of the issuance of the warrants, the
three accused jointly filed a motion for
reinvestigationand for the recall of the warrants
of arrest. On the date set for hearing of their
motion, none of the accused showed up in court
for fear of being arrested. The RTC judge denied
their motion because the RTC did not acquire
jurisdictionover the persons of the movants. Did
the RTC rule correctly?(08 Bar Q10).

A.

The RTC did not rule correctly in denying the
motion for reinvestigation and for the recall of the
warrants of the arrest.
Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
acquired either by his arrest or by his voluntary
appearance in court. The voluntary appearance of
the accused may be made by the filing of a
pleading or motion in court asking for affirmative
relief. Here the accused voluntarily appeared when
they filed the motion asking for affirmative relief,
that is, a reinvestigation.
Moreover, resolution of a motion to quash a
warrant of arrest does not require that the court
have jurisdiction over the person of the accused
and resolution of a motion for reinvestigation does
not require that the accused be in the custody of
the law. (Miranda v. Tuliao, G.R. No. 158763, 31
March 2006).
283

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

The accused in a criminal case for falsification
of public document filed a motion for
redetermination of probable cause before the
MTC.The MTCdenied the motion on the ground
that it did not have jurisdiction over the person
of the accused who had not yet been arrested.
Was the MTC'sdenial correct?

A.

No. One who seeks affirmative relief from a court,
whether in a criminal or civil case, is deemed to
have submitted his person to the jurisdiction of the
court. While custody of the law is required before a
court can act upon a bail application, it is not
required for the adjudication of other reliefs where
the mere application constitutes a submission of
one's person to the court's jurisdiction. (David v.
Agbay, 18 March 2015).

Q.

An accused former mayor was charged before
the Sandiganbayanwith the complex crime of
malversationof public funds through falsification
of official/public documents.The amount alleged
to have been malversed was P274,000. The
Ombudsman recommended that no bail be
granted. The Sandiganbayan issued an arrest
order adopting the "no bail" recommendationof
the Ombudsman. The accused,who was still at
large, caused the filing of a Motion to Set Aside
No Bail Recommendationand to Fix the Amount
of Bail. The Ombudsman argued that the
Sandiganbayancannot grant affirmative relief to
the accused who was at large. Was the
Ombudsmancorrect?

A.

No. Consistent with Miranda v. Tuliao, G.R. No.
158763, 31 March 2006, an affirmative relief may
be obtained from the court despite the accused
284

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

being still at-large. Except in petition for bail,
custody of the law is not required for the adjudication
of reliefs sought by the defendant (such as a
motion to set aside no bail recommendation and to
fix the amount of bail in this case) where the mere
application therefor constitutes a waiver of the
defense of lack of jurisdiction over the person of the
accused. (People v. Valdez, 8 December 2015,
e.b., Peralta, J.).
Q.

The accused were charged before the RTC of
the crime of large scale estafa punishable by
reclusion perpetua. A warrant of arrest was
issued against them. Four years later, the
accused filed a motion to quash warrant of
arrest and to fix bail. They claimed that the
Informations failed to allege that the crimes
charged against them had been amended by
PresidentialDecreeNo. 1689,hence,the penalty
for estafa under paragraph2(a), Article 315 of
the RPC shall be in the range of reclusion
temporal, as maximum. They averred that the
Informations, likewise, failed to allege any
aggravating circumstance which is necessary
for the purpose of imposing the penalty of
reclusion perpetua. Thus, petitioners averred
that the imposable penalty cannot exceed 20
years of imprisonmentwhich is the maximumof
reclusion temporal, therefore,the chargesin the
Informations are bailable, and that they are
entitled to bail for their provisional liberty. The
RTC denied the motion on the ground that the
accused continued to be at large and thus the
court has no jurisdiction over their persons.
Wasthe denial by the RTCcorrect?
285

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No, the requirement that the accused must be in
custody of law applies only to an application for
bail, not to applications for other relief. However,
albeit, at large, it must be clarified that accused's
motion to quash warrant of arrest and to fix bail is
not an application for bail. They were neither
applying for bail, nor were they posting bail. Of
course if the motion to fix bail is granted, the
accused must be in custody of law when they apply
for bail. (Padua v. People, 4 Feb 2019, Peralta, J.).
The ground that the court has no jurisdiction over
the persons of the accused is misplaced. Jurisdiction
over the person of an accused is not required in a
motion to quash an arrest warrant. Insofar as the
motion to fix the bail is concerned, the court acquired
jurisdiction over the accused when they filed such
motion from the court seeking affirmative relief. (See
Miranda v. Tullao, 31 March 2006).
-

Q.

Outline the criminal jurisdiction of courts.

A.

MUNICIPAL TRIAL COURTS

Exclusive originaljurisdiction (ROBoT 6.4N)
1) Violations of city or municipal ordinances committed
within their respective territorialjurisdictions.
2) Violations of traffic laws, rules, and regulations.
3) Violations of the rental law.
4) Violations of B.P. Big. 22 or the Bouncing
Checks Law.
5) Offenses punishable with imprisonment not
exceeding 6 years, irrespective of the amount of
fine; provided, however, that in offenses

286

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

involving damage to property through criminal
negligence, they shall have exclusive original
jurisdiction.
6) Offenses where the only penalty provided
by law is a fine, where such fine does not
exceed P4,000. (See Adm. Cir. No. 09-94, 14
June 1994).33
REGIONAL TRIAL COURTS
Exclusive originaljurisdiction (MC WEED)
1) Criminal cases not falling within the exclusive
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal, or body.
2) Criminal actions or proceedings for violation of
the Omnibus Election Code.
3) Cases of written defamation.
4) Criminal actions involving violations of the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002.
5) Money-Laundering cases. Those committed by
public officers and private persons who are in
conspiracy with such public officers shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan.
6) Violations of the Cybercrime Prevention Act.
(21, R.A. No. 10175).
Family Courts (MD VCD)
1) Criminal cases where one or more of the
accused is below 18 years of age but not less
than 9 years of age, or where one or more of
33

1f the fine exceeds P4,000, then it is the RTC which has jurisdiction.

287

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the victims is a minor at the time of the
commission of the offense.
2) Cases against minors cognizable
Dangerous Drugs Act as amended.

under the

3) Violations of RA No. 7610 or the Child Abuse Act.
4) Cases of domestic violence against women and
children. (Sec. 5, R.A No. 8369).
5) Cases of violence against women and their
children under RA. No. 9262 (VOWCHI Act).
The Family Court has no jurisdiction in a
murder case where the minor victims are dead.
Undoubtedly, in vesting in family courts exclusive
original jurisdiction over criminal cases involving
minors, the law but seeks to protect their welfare
and best interests. Here there is no living minor in
the murder cases that require the special attention
and protection of a family court. (People v. Dela
Torre-Yadao, 13 November 2012, e.b., Abad, J.).

Special Commercial Courts
Actions or proceedings involving violations of
intellectual property rights (AM. No. 03-03-03-SC
effective 1 July 2003; Samson v. Daway, 21 July
2004, Ynares-Santiago, J.).

Appellate jurisdiction
Over all cases decided by the MTC within its
territorial jurisdiction.

288

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

SANDIGANBAYAN
Original exclusivejurisdiction
A.
a) Violations of the Anti-Graft Law and Chapter 2,
Section 2, Title VII, Book II of the Revised Penal
Code, where one or more of the accused are
officials occupying the following positions in the
government, whether in a permanent, acting or
interim capacity, at the time of the commission
of the offense:
(1) Officials of the executive branch occupying the
positions of regional director and higher,
otherwise classified as Grade "27" and higher
of the Compensation and Position Classification
Act of 1989 (R.A. No. 6758), specifically including:
(a) Provincial
governors,
vice-governors,
members of the sangguniang panlalawigan, and
provincial treasurers, assessors, engineers, and
other provincial department heads;
(b) City mayors, vice-mayors, members of the
sangguniang panlungsod, city treasurer, assessors,
engineers, and other city department heads;
(c) Officials
of the diplomatic
service
occupying the position of consul and higher;
(d) Philippine army and air force colonels,
naval captains, and all officers of higher rank;
(e) Officers of the PNP while occupying the
position of provincial director and those holding the
rank of senior superintendent or higher;
289

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(f) City and provincial prosecutors and their
assistants, and officials and prosecutors in the
office of the Ombudsman and special prosecutor;
(g) Presidents, directors or trustees,
managers of GOCCs, state universities
educational institutions or foundations.

or
or

(2) Members of Congress and officials thereof
classified as Grade "27" and up under the
Compensation and Position Classification Act
of 1989;
(3) Members of the judiciary without prejudice to
the provisions of the Constitution;
(4) Chairmen and members of Constitutional
Commissions,
without
prejudice to the
provisions of the Constitution; and
(5) All other national and local officials classified as
Grade "27" and higher under the Compensation
and Position Classification Act of 1989.
b) Other offenses or felonies whether simple or
complexed with other crimes committed by the public
officials and employees mentioned in subsection "a"
of this section in relation to their office.
c) Civil and criminal cases filed pursuant to and in
connection with Executive Order Nos. 1, 2, 14
and 14-A, issued in 1986.
Provided that the RTC shall have exclusive
original jurisdiction where the information: (a) does
not allege any damage to the government or any
bribery; or (b) alleges damage to the government or
bribery arising from the same or closely related
transactions or acts in an amount not exceeding

P1 ,000,000.
290

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

In cases where none of the accused are
occupying positions corresponding to Salary Grade
27 or higher, or military and PNP officers mentioned
above, exclusive original jurisdiction thereof shall
be vested in the proper RTC or MTC as the case
may be, pursuant to B.P. Big. 129.
Appellatejurisdiction
Over final judgments, resolutions or orders of
the RTC whether in the exercise of their own
original jurisdiction or of their appellate jurisdiction
as provided in P.O. No. 1606.
In case private individuals are charged as coprincipals, accomplices or accessories with the
public officers or employees, including those
employed in GOCCs, they shall be tried jointly with
said public officers and employees in the proper
courts which shall exercise exclusive jurisdiction
over them. (P.O. No. 1606 as amended by R.A.
Nos. 7975, 8249, and 10660).
Sandiganbayan has no jurisdiction over charge
against BIR Regional Director whose salary grade
does not exceed 26. (Duncano v. Sandiganbayan,
15 July 2015, Peralta, J.).
Q.

An informationfor illegal drug trading in violation
of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act
(CODA) was filed against Sen. Leila De Lima
before the RTC of Muntinlupa City.
The
informationalleged that accused took advantage
of her public position as then DOJ Secretary to
commit illegal drug trading in the New Bilibid
Prison, the proceeds of which she used to fund
her senatorial campaign. The accused filed a
motion to quash contending that the allegations
291

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

in the informationshow that the drug-tradingwas
an office-relatedoffense, i.e., the acts described
in the Information were intimately relatedto her
position as the Secretary of Justice. Thus it is
the Sandiganbayan (SB) which has exclusive
jurisdiction over the offense charged.Should the
motion to quash be granted?
A.

No, the motion to quash should not be granted.
The RTC has exclusive jurisdiction over violations
of the CODA per Sec. 90. Sec. 90 of the CODA
(RA 9165) is a special law which prevails over Sec.
4(b) of PD 1606 (conferring jurisdiction upon the SB
over office-related crimes) which is a general law.
Hence even if the illegal drug trading was officerelated, it is the RTC not the SB which has
jurisdiction over the offense charged. (De Lima v.
Guerrero, 10 October 2017, e.b., Velasco, J.).

Q.

The Ombudsman,after conducting the requisite
preliminary investigation, found probable cause
to charge Gov. Matigas in conspiracy with
Carpintero, a private individual, for violating
Section 3(e) of RepublicAct (RA) No. 3019(AntiGraft and Corrupt Practices Act, as amended).
Before the information could be filed with the
Sandiganbayan, Gov. Matigas was killed in an
ambush. This, notwithstanding, an information
was filed against Gov. Matigas and Carpintero.
At the Sandiganbayan, Carpintero through
counsel, filed a Motion to Quashthe Information,
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction of the
Sandiganbayan, arguing that with the death of
Gov. Matigas, there is no public officer charged
in the information. Is the motion to quash
legally tenable? (14 Bar Q15)

292

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

A.

No, the motion to quash is not legally tenable.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that the death of the public officer did
not mean that the allegation of conspiracy between
the public officer and the private person can no
longer be proved or that their alleged conspiracy is
already expunged. The only thing extinguished by
the death of the public officer was his criminal
liability. His death did not extinguish the crime nor
did it remove the basis of the charge of conspiracy
between him and the private person. Hence the
Sandiganbayan had jurisdiction over the offense
charged. [People v. Go, 25 March 2014, Peralta, J.]
COURT OF APPEALS

Appellatejurisdiction

Over final judgments, decisions, resolutions,
orders, or awards of the RTC and the Family Court.
COURT OF TAX APPEALS
Originaljurisdiction

Over all criminal offenses arising from
violations of the NIRC, TCC, and other laws
administered by the BIR or the BoC. Provided
however that offenses or felonies where the
principal amount of taxes and fees, exclusive of
charges and penalties, claimed is less than P1
million or where there is no specified amount
claimed shall be tried by the regular courts and
the jurisdiction of the CTA shall be appellate.

293

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Appellatejurisdiction
Over appeals from the judgments, resolutions
or orders of the RTC in tax cases originally decided
by them.
Over petitions for review of the judgments,
resolutions or orders of the RTC in the exercise of
their appellate jurisdiction over tax cases decided
by the MTC.
SUPREME COURT
Appellatejurisdiction
Criminal cases decided by the Court
Appeals, Sandiganbayan, and CTA.
Q.

of

What cases before the MTC are governed by the
Rule on Summary Procedure? (ROBoT 6.1-N)

A.
1) Violations of traffic laws, rules, and regulations.
2) Violations of the rental law.
3) Violations of municipal and city ordinances.
4) Violations of B.P. Big. 22 (Bouncing Checks Law).
5) All other criminal cases where the penalty is
imprisonment not exceeding 6 (six) months, or a
fine not exceeding P1 ,000, or both.
6) Offenses involving damage to property through
criminal negligence where the imposable fine
does not exceed P10,000.34
341991
Revised Rule on Summary Procedure, as amended by A.M. No.
00-11-01-SC, effective 15 April 2003, which included B.P. Big. 22 cases within
_ the coverage of the RSP.

294

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

Q. In complex crimes, how is the jurisdiction of a
court determined?(03 Bar Q13).
A.

In complex crimes, the jurisdiction of the court is
determined by the penalty prescribed for the more
serious crime in its maximum period. This is pursuant
to Article 48 of the Revised Penal Code which
provides for such a penalty for complex crimes. [See
Cuyos v. Garcia, 160 SCRA 302 (1988)]

Q. Mario, a resident of QuezonCity, sued for libel
the editor, publisher and columnist of Ang
Bagong Pilipino, a newspaper of general
circulation, with principal office at Binondo,
Manila. He claimed that becausehis reputation
had been badly besmirched by the offensive
article he suffered damages estimated at P1
million. The case was filed before the Regional
Trial Court of QuezonCity.
The accused moved to quash the
Information on the ground that the RTChad no
jurisdiction to try the case considering that
under Sec. 2 of R.A. 7691, Metropolitan Trial
Courts exercise exclusive original jurisdiction
over all offenses punishablewith imprisonment
not exceeding six years (of which libel is one)
irrespective of the amount of fine, accessoryor
other penalties or civil liability arising from the
offense. The accused also claimed that the
offensive article was printed and first published
in Manila so that the case should have been
filed with the MetropolitanTrial Court of Manila.
Decide. Discussfully. (95 Bar Q6).

295

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The motion to quash the information should be
denied.
The ground that the Metropolitan Trial Courts
exercise exclusive original jurisdiction since the
penalty of imprisonment did not exceed six years is
without merit.
The Supreme Court has held that the
jurisdiction of the Regional Trial Court over libel
cases, as provided under Article 360 of the Revised
Penal Code, has not been affected by R.A. 7691.
(Arambulo v. Laqui, 12 October 2000).
The ground that the offensive  article was
printed and first published in Manila so that the
case should have been filed with the Metropolitan
Trial Court of Manila is also without merit.
Under Article 360 of the Revised Penal Code,
in case of libel against a private complainant, the
criminal action may also be filed with the RTC
where any of the offended parties actually resides
at the time of the commission of the offense.
Here the private complainant Mario, a Quezon
City resident, may safely be presumed to have
resided in Quezon City at the time of the
commission of the offense, in the absence of any
contrary indication. Hence the venue was properly
laid in Quezon City.

Q.

May injunction lie to restrain criminal prosecution?

A.

The general rule is that writs of prohibition or
injunction are not available to restrain criminal
prosecution. The exceptions are the following:
1) When necessary to protect the constitutional
rights of the accused.
296

J9JC9B0M

Preliminaries

2) When necessary for the orderly administration of
justice or to avoid oppression or multiplicity
of actions.
3) When there is a prejudicial question which is
sub judice.
4) When the acts of the officer are without or in
excess of authority.
5) When the prosecution is under an invalid law or
regulation.
6) When there is double jeopardy.
7) When the court has no jurisdiction
offense.

over the

8) When it is a case of persecution rather than
prosecution.
9) When the charges are manifestly false and
motivated by the lust for vengeance.
10) When there is clearly no prima facie case
against the accused and a motion to quash on
that ground has been denied.
(Brocka v. Enrile, 192 SCRA 183).

297

What is a criminal action? Rule 1, Sec. 3 (b) A criminal action is one by which the
State prosecutes a person for an act or omission punishable by law.

J9JC9B0M

RULE 110. PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES
Q.

What is criminal procedure?

A.

Criminal procedure is that branch of remedial law
which provides for the procedure for the
apprehension, prosecution, and trial of persons
accused of any crime.

Q.

How are the rules of criminal procedure construed?

A.

The rules shall be liberally construed in favor of the
accused and strictly construed against the State in
order to level the playing field between the accused
who is up against the awesome machinery of
the State.

Q.

How are criminal actions instituted?

A.

Criminal actions shall be instituted as follows:

For offenses where a preliminary investigation is
required
By filing the complaint with the proper officer
for the purpose of preliminary investigation.

For offenses where a preliminaryinvestigation is
not required
By filing the complaint or information directly
with the municipal trial court and municipal circuit
trial courts or by filing the complaint with the office
of the prosecutor.
In Manila and other chartered cities, the complaint
shall be filed with the office of the prosecutor unless
otherwise provided in their charters. (81 R110).

298

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

What is the effect of the institution of the
criminal action?

A.

It shall interrupt the running of the prescriptive
period of the offense charged unless otherwise
provided in special laws. (S1 R110). The period of
prescription shall commence to run from the day on
which the crime is discovered by the offended
party, the authorities, or their agents, and shall be
interrupted by the filing of the complaint or
information. (Art. 91, Revised Penal Code).

Q.

The accused was charged with violating a
municipal ordinance by quarrying without a
permit on 11 May 1990 in Rodriguez, Rizal. A
complaint was filed by the police with the
prosecutor's office on 30 May 1990 but the
corresponding information was filed with the
municipaltrial court only on 2 October1990.The
accusedfiled a motion to quashon the ground of
prescription,pointing out that underAct No.3326,
violations penalized by ordinances shall
prescribeafter two months from the commission
of the offense and the information was filed in
court after more than 60 days from its
commission. The prosecutionon the other hand
argued that the filing of the complaint with the
prosecutor'soffice interruptedthe running of the
prescriptive period pursuant to 51 R110 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure.Should the motion
to quashbe granted?

A.

Yes. The Supreme Court en bane held that the
crime had prescribed since the information was
filed in court only on 2 October 1990 or more than
two months from the commission of the offense on
11 May 1990. Violations of municipal ordinances
299

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

are covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure
and not by 81 R110. A perusal of Section 9 of the
Rule on Summary Procedure35 reveals that the
criminal case is commenced only upon the filing of
the complaint or information in court. Hence the
running of the prescriptive period shall be halted on
the date the case is actually filed in court and not
on any date before that.
This interpretation is also in consonance Act
No. 3326 which governs the prescriptive period for
violations of special laws and ordinances. Under
Section 2 of this act, the period of prescription shall
be suspended "when proceedings are instituted
against the guilty party." The proceedings referred
to in Section 2 thereof are "judicial proceedings."
(Zaldivia v. Reyes, 211 SCRA 277 [1992]).
Q.

Tongson issued checks in favor of Panaguiton.
When presented for payment, the checks were
dishonored on 18 March 1993for insufficiency of
funds. Demandsfor paymentby Panaguitonwent
unheeded.On 24 August 1995,Panaguitionfiled a
complaint for violation of B.P. Big. 22 against
Tongson before the Quezon City Prosecutor's
Office. In 1999,the Prosecutor'sOffice dismissed
Panaguiton's complaint on the ground that the
action had already prescribedpursuantto Act No.
3326 which provides that violations of special
laws which do not provide for their own
prescriptive periods shall prescribe in four years
unless interrupted by the institution of judicial
proceedings. According to the Prosecutor's
Office, since it was more than four years from 18
March 1993and the information had not yet been
35Now

Section 11 of the 1991 Revised Rules on Summary Procedure.

300

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

filed in court, the criminal action had already
prescribed. Was the prosecution for violation of
B.P. Big. 22 barred by prescription?
A.

No, the prosecution for violation of B.P. Big. 22 was
not barred by prescription.
The Supreme Court held that the filing of the
complaint with the prosecutor's office already tolled
the running of the prescriptive period even if the
offense is for the violation of a special law. The
Supreme Court held that the word "proceedings" in
Section 2 of Act No. 3326 by which prescription is
interrupted should be deemed to refer to
proceedings both judicial or executive in character.
It pointed out that when Act No. 3326 was passed
in 1926, preliminary investigation of criminal
offenses was conducted by justices of the peace,
thus, the phraseology in the law, "institution of
judicial proceedings for its investigation and
punishment,"and the prevailing rule at.the time was
that once a complaint is filed with the justice of the
peace for preliminary investigation, the prescription
of the offense is halted. (Panaguiton v. Department
of Justice, 571 SCRA 549 [2008]).
Here the complaint was filed in 1995 with the
prosecutor's office. Hence the prescriptive period
was interrupted by such filing.
The ruling in Panaguiton was reiterated in
People v. Pangilinan, 672 SCRA 105 (2012).36
361t

is submitted that the Panaguiton and Pangilinan rulings should apply
only to violations of special laws not covered by the Revised Rules on Summary
Procedure. For criminal cases covered by the Revised Rules on Summary
Procedure, the Zaldivia ruling should still prevail, pursuant to 811 of the RRSP.
Thus the prescriptive period for the crime of slight physical injuries would be
interrupted only by the filing of the complaint or the information in court. It should
be noted that at the times material to Panaguiton and Pangilinan, violations of

301

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

On 17 May 2003 Respondentparked his car in a
no-parking zone in Baguio City. Petitioner
Jadewell Parking Systems put clamps on the
Respondent's wheel in order to immobilize his
car. Respondentremovedthe clamps and drove
away with them. On 23 May2003Petitionerfiled
a complaint-affidavit for robbery with the
prosecutor's office against Respondent. After
preliminary investigation, the Prosecutor found
probable cause for violation of Baguio City
Ordinance No. 003-2000(rather than robbery)
against the Respondentand filed the information
with the MTCof Baguio City on 2 October2003.
Respondent filed a motion to quash on the
ground of extinction of the criminal liability,
pointing out that under Act No. 3326,violations
penalized by municipal ordinances shall
prescribeafter two months from the commission
of the offense. The prosecution countered that
the filing of the complaint with the prosecutor's
office already interrupted the period of
prescription pursuant to 51 R110. Should the
motion to quash be granted?

A.

Yes. A criminal case involving the violation of a
municipal or city ordinance is governed by the
Rules on Summary Procedure. As provided in the
Revised Rules on Summary Procedure, only the
filing of a complaint or information in court tolls the
prescriptive period where the crime charged the
violation of an ordinance. The ruling in Zaldivia v.
Reyes is applicable. Since the informationwas filed

B.P. Big. 22 were not yet covered by the RRSP. The coverage of the RRSP was
extended to B.P. Big. 22 cases only on 15 April 2003. It is submitted that
because of this, the Panaguiton and Pangilinan rulings are no longer good case
law and hence the prescriptive period for violations of B.P. Big. 22 is interrupted
only upon the filing of the case in court.

302

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

with the court after the lapse of two months from
the commission of the offense, then the criminal
action was extinguished by prescription. (Jadewe/1
Parking Systems Corp. v. Udua, G.R. No. 169588,
7 October 2013).
The court in Jadewe/1 distinguished the facts of
the case from People v. Pangilinan, 672 SCRA 105
(2012), and Panaguiton v. Department of Justice,
571 SCRA 549 (2008), which involved the violation
of a special law, i.e., B.P. Big. 22.37

Q. On 21 February1990,EnriqueMagnowas stabbed
on the right arm by Armando Reyes at Balara,
Quezon City. A complaint for slight physical
injuries was filed against Reyeswith the office of
the City Prosecutor on 28 February 1990 as the
injuries required 5 days of medical attendance.
The information for slight physical injuries was
filed on 12 May 1990 with the Quezon City
MetropolitanTrial Court. Reyes moved to quash
the informationon the ground of prescriptionas it
was filed on the soth day, whereasthe prescriptive
period for slight physical injuries is 60 days.
Should the motion to quash be granted? Decide
with reasons. (90 Bar Q13).
A.

The motion to quash should be granted. The
Supreme Court has held that in criminal cases
governed by the Revised Rules on Summary
Procedure, the prescriptive period would be
interrupted not by the filing of the complaint with the
prosecutor's office but by the filing of the
information in court. (Zaldivia v. Reyes, 211 SCRA

37This
distinction can no longer be drawn because violations of 8.P. Big 22
are now covered by the Revised Rule on Summary Procedure.

303

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

277 [1992]; Jadewe/1 Parking Systems Corp. v.
Lidua, 706 SCRA 724 [2013]).
Here the offense involved is slight physical
injuries which is covered by the Revised Rules on
Summary Procedure, since the penalty thereof
does not exceed six months or a fine of P1 ,000.
Hence the offense of slight physical injuries had
prescribed since the information was filed in court
more than 60 days after its commission.38
Q.

Who can prosecute criminal actions?

A.

All criminal actions commenced by a complaint or
information shall be prosecuted under the direction
and control of the public prosecutor. (SS R 110).

Q.

May a private lawyer prosecutea criminalcase?

A.

Yes a private lawyer (i.e., a private prosecutor) may
prosecute a criminal case in the following situations:
a) When the civil action for recovery of the civil
liability is instituted in the criminal action
pursuant to R111, the offended party may
intervene by counsel in the prosecution of the
offense. (816 R110). Nevertheless the private
prosecutor must be under the direction and
control of the public prosecutor who hence must
be present during the proceedings.

381n
People v. Bautista, G.R. No. 168641, 27 April 2007 (3'ct Div.), a case
involving slight physical injuries, the Supreme Court held that the running of the
prescriptive period was tolled by the filing of the complaint with the prosecutor's
office. The ruling, which did not take into account the Zaldivia doctrine and the
Revised Rules on Summary Procedure, is arguable. The Zaldivia doctrine cannot
be modified or reversed except by the court sitting en bane. (Sec. 4rnJ. Art..VIII, ---- - - -Constitution).
-

304

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

b) In case of heavy work schedule of the public
prosecutor or in the event of lack of public
prosecutors, the private prosecutor may be
authorized in writing by the Chief of the
Prosecution Office or the Regional State
Prosecutor to prosecute the case subject to the
approval of the court. Once so authorized, the
private prosecutor shall continue to prosecute
the case up to the end of the trial even in the
absence of the public prosecutor, unless the
authority is revoked or otherwise withdrawn.
(85 R110).
Q.

When is the issuance of the written authority in
favor of the private prosecutor mandatory?

A.

In cases where only the civil liability is being
prosecuted by a private prosecutor, the head of the
prosecution office must issue in favor of the private
prosecutor a written authority to try the case even in
the absence of the public prosecutor. The written
authority must be submitted to the court prior to the
presentation of evidence by the private prosecutor
in accordance with 85 R110. (Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

Q.

Jeffrey "Jennifer" Laude was killed in Olongapo
City by US Marine Lance Corporal Joseph Scott
Pemberton. Pursuant to the Visiting Forces
Agreement, Pemberton was detained in Camp
Aguinaldo. Marilou S. Laude, Jeffrey'ssister, filed
an Urgent Motion to Compel the Armed Forces of
the Philippines to Surrender Custody of Accused
to the Olongapo City Jail. The motion did not
contain the written conformity of the Public
Prosecutor and for that reason was denied by the
RTC of Olongapo City. Was the denial correct?

305

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes. 85 R110 provides that all criminal actions shall
be prosecuted under the direction and control of the
public prosecutor. In criminal cases, the People is
the real party in interest, which means allowing a
private complainant to pursue a criminal action on
his own is a rare exception. The duty and authority
to prosecute the criminal aspects of this case,
including the custody issue, are duly lodged in the
Public Prosecutor. (Laude v. Ginez-Jabalde, 24
November 2015, e.b., Leanen, J.).

Q.

What are private crimes?

A.

Private crimes are those which cannot be
prosecuted de oficio. Otherwise put they cannot be
prosecuted except upon a complaint filed by the
offended party.
In private crimes, the law confers upon the
offended party a choice to protect his or her privacy
rather than suffering the embarassment or
stigma of a trial.

Q.

What are the private crimes?

A.

The following are the private crimes. (CASAL D)
1) Concubinage.
2) Adultery.
3) Seduction.
4) Abduction.
5) Acts of Lasciviousness.
6) Defamation which consists of the imputation of
any of the above offenses. (85 R110).

306

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

Is the complaint by the offended party required
to be sworn to or under oath?

A.

While it is desirable that the complaint be sworn to
or under oath pursuant to 83 R110 and S3(a)
R112, nothing in the wordings of Article 344 of the
Revised Penal Code and 85 R112 requires the
complaint to be sworn to. The complaint mentioned
in 85 R 110 should be given a liberal rather than a
strict interpretation. The overriding consideration in
determining compliance with the requirement is the
intent and determination of the offended party to
seek judicial redress. In a case the Supreme Court
did not disregard the victim's sa/aysay for mere lack
of an oath for that would amount to suppressing her
anguished cry for redress. (People v. Sangi/, 208
SCRA 696 [1992]).

Q.

If the prosecution of the above crimes was
made by an information filed by the prosecutor
rather than by a complaint by the offended
party, may the information be quashed? If so,
on what ground?

A.

Yes the information may be quashed on the ground of
lack of jurisdiction of the court. This is because in
private crimes, the offended party's complaint is
jurisdictional by virtue of Article 344 of the Revised
Penal Code and 85 R110 of the Rules of Court;
without the offended party's complaint, the court will
not acquire jurisdiction to try the case. (People v.
Palabas, G.R. No. L-8827, 31 August 1954; People v.
Santos, 101 Phil. 798; People v. Zurbano, G.R. No. L32673; see 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 203-205 [61h rev. ed.]).

307

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

State the rule in the prosecution of the crimes
of adultery and concubinage.

A.

Adultery and concubinage shall not be prosecuted
except upon a complaint filed by the offended
spouse. The offended party cannot institute criminal
prosecution without including the guilty parties, if
both are alive, nor, in any case, if the offended
party has consented to the offense or pardoned the
offenders. (S5 R110).

Q.

Efraim filed with the office of the prosecutor a
complaint-affidavit against his wife Cecile and
her paramour Avelino. After the preliminary
investigation,the prosecutorfiled an information
for adultery against Cecile and Avelino. Cecile
and Avelino filed a motion to quash on the
ground of lack of jurisdiction of the court since
the case was not prosecuted upon a complaint
filed by the offended spouse but upon an
information filed by the prosecutor. Should the
motion to quash be granted?

A.

The motion to quash should not be granted. The
complaint mentioned in S5 R110 should be given a
liberal rather than a strict interpretation; hence it
refers not only to the complaint mentioned in S3
R110 but also to the complaint-affidavit filed before
the prosecutor under S3(a) R112. The overriding
consideration in determining compliance with the
requirement is the intent and determination of the
offended party to seek judicial redress. (People v.
1/arde, 125 SCRA 11 [1983]; People v. Sangil, 208
SCRA 696 [1992]).
Where the offended party's complaint is not
attached to the information, the same should be

308

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

produced as evidence by the prosecution or upon
court order pursuant to S? R 112. This is because
the records of the preliminary investigation do not
form part of the record of the case.
Q.

The sworn statement of the offended party
charging the accused with abduction was
signed by her in the office of the chief of police.
The chief of police then filed the complaintaffidavit with the office of the prosecutor who after
preliminary investigation filed the information. The
accused filed a motion to quash on the ground
of lack of jurisdictionassailing both the complaint
of the chief of police and the informationfiled by
the assistant provincial prosecutor
 as being
insufficientto confer jurisdiction upon the court.
Should the motion to quash be granted?

A.

No. The complaint mentioned in SS R110 should be
given a liberal rather than a strict interpretation. The
overriding consideration in determining. compliance
with the requirement is the intent and determination of
the offended party to seek judicial redress. Here the
sworn statement of the victim hardly can cast doubt
on her evident resolve to bring the accused to justice.
(People v. 1/arde, 125 SCRA 11 [1983]; People v.
Sangi/, 208 SCRA 696 [1992]).

Q.

What is the crime of adultery?

A.

Adultery is the crime committed by any married
woman who shall have sexual intercourse with a
man not her husband and by the man who has
carnal knowledge of a married woman knowing her
to be married, even if the marriage be subsequently
declared void. (Article 333, Revised Penal Code).

309

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the crime of concubinage?

A.

Concubinage is the crime committed by any husband
who shall keep a mistress in the conjugal dwelling, or
shall have sexual intercourse, under scandalous
circumstances, with a woman who is not his wife, or
shall cohabit with her in any other place.
The concubine shall suffer the penalty of
destierro. (Article 334, Revised Penal Code).

Q.

Husband 1 of Wife 1 is having an affair with
Wife 2 of Husband 2. Both Husband 1 and Wife
2 are aware of each other's married status. Wife
1 wants to file a criminal complaintfor adultery.
May she file the complaintagainst Wife 2 only?

A.

No. In fact Wife 1 cannot file the complaint as she
is not the offended party. The offended spouse in
adultery is the husband of the adulterous woman.
(See Article 333, Revised Penal Code). The
cuckolded husband may choose to suffer the
ignominity in silence rather than bringing a public
prosecution. The wife of the adulterous man is not
an offended party. This can be gleaned from the
fact that adultery cannot arise if the woman having
sex with a married man is unmarried.

Q.

Same facts as above except that it will be
Husband 2 who will be filing the criminal
complaint for adultery. Can Husband 2 file the
complaintagainst Husband 1 only?
,

A.

No. Husband 2, the offended spouse, must include
both guilty parties. Hence Husband 2, if he wants to
file the complaint, must include both Wife 2 and
Husband 1.

310

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q. Magdalena Campos, a married woman and
SantiagoMendoza,a married man, were indicted
for adultery in an information filed by the
Prosecutor of Bataan upon a sworn complaint
filed by Mrs. Cynthia Mendoza,wife of Santiago.
Both accused filed a motion to quash alleging
that the trial court has not acquired jurisdiction
over the case because no complaint has been
filed by the husband of Magdalena Campos.
They cite Section 5, Rule 110 of the Revised
Rules of Court which provides, among others,
that the crime of adultery "... shall not be
prosecutedexcept upon a complaintfiled by the
offended spouse." How would you resolve the
motion to quash?(91 Bar Q12B).
A.

I would grant the motion to quash.
Under Section 5 of Rule 110, the crime of
adultery shall not be prosecuted except upon a
complaint filed by the offended spouse.
Here the one who filed the complaint was the
wife of Santiago. The offended spouse in adultery
is not her but the husband of Magdalena. (See
Article 333, Revised Penal Code; U.S. v. Asuncion,
22 Phil. 358). Hence the court did not acquire
jurisdiction over the case.
Note: The UP Law Center Committee gives an
alternative answer wherein Mrs. Mendoza would be
consideredan offended party. For the considerations
stated above, it is believed that this alternative
answer is not correct.

Q.

Petitioner was the former head of the HR
department of Standard Chartered Bank (SCB).
He bought the so-called "Global Third Party
311

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Mutual Funds" (GTPMF) from SCB wherein he
invested US$8,000. His investment however
depreciated to US$3,000. Subsequently Petitioner
learned that SCB had offered for sale and sold
the GTPMF without registeringthe same first as
securities with the SEC. Petitioner then filed with
the DOJ a complaint for violation of Section 8.1 of
the SRC. The DOJ dismissed the petitioner's
complaint holding that it should have been filed
with the SEC. Was the dismissal correct?

A.

Yes. The prosecution of complaints for violation of
special laws shall be governed by the provisions
thereof. (S5 R110). Under Sec. 53.1 of the
Securities Regulation Code, a criminal complaint
for violation of any law or rule administered by the
SEC must first be filed with it. If the SEC finds that
there is probable cause, then it should refer the
case to the DOJ. A criminal charge for the violation
of the SRC is a specialized dispute. Hence it must
first be referred to an administrative agency of
special competence, i.e., the SEC. Under the
doctrine of primary jurisdiction, a court will not
determine a controversy involving a question within
the jurisdiction of the administrative tribunal, where
the question demands the exercise of sound
administrative discretion requiring the specialized
knowledge and expertise of said administrative
tribunal to determine technical and intricate matters
of fact. (Baviera v. Paglinawan, G.R. No. 168380, 8
February 2007).

Q.

May the offended party intervene in the criminal
action?

A.

Yes, the offended party may intervene by counsel in
the prosecution of the offense if the civil action for
312

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

recovery of civil liability is instituted in the criminal
action. (S16 R110).
Q.

Prosecutionof X for the murder of Y. At the bail
hearings, the prosecution was scheduled to
present 9 witnesses to prove the strong guilt of
the accused. The RTC judge however insisted
on terminating the proceedings after the fifth
witness had been presented. Subsequently the
RTC granted the application of X for bail.
Alleging grave abuse of discretion, Z (Y's
father) filed a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals
dismissed the petition on the ground that Z has
no personality to file the petition without the
imprimatur of the Solicitor General.
a) Did the Court of Appeals act correctly in
dismissing the case?
b) Would your answer be the same if the judge
had allowed the prosecution to present the 9
witnesses before rendering its order
granting the bail?

A.
a) No. While the rule is only the Solicitor
General may bring or defend actions on behalf of the
Republic of the Philippines, or represent the People
or the State in criminal proceedings pending in the
Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal, the ends of
substantial justice would be better served, and the
issues in the action could be determined in a more
just, speedy and inexpensive manner, by entertaining
the petition. As an offended party in a criminal case,
Z has sufficient personality and a valid grievance
against the RTC's order granting bail to the alleged

313

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

murderer of his father. The offended parties in
criminal cases have sufficient interest and
personality as "person(s) aggrieved' to file the
special civil action of prohibition and certiorari under
Sections 1 and 2 of Rule 65 in line with the
underlying spirit of the liberal construction of the
Rules of Court in order to promote their object.
(People v. Calo, 186 SCRA 620).39 The complainant
has such an interest in the civil aspect of the case
that he may file a special civil action questioning the
decision or  action of the respondent court on
jurisdictional grounds.In so doing, complainant
should not bring the action in the name of the People
of the Philippines. He should do so and prosecute it
in his name as such complainant. (Rodriguez v.
Gadiane, G.R. No. 152903, 17 July 2006).
The RTC judge's order was null and void for
the judge acted with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of jurisdiction in terminating the
proceedings prematurely. His order was null and
void for violation of procedural due process.
(People v. Calo, supra).
b) No, my answer would not be the same. In such
a case the Court of Appeals would have
correctly dismissed the petition since we apply
the general rule that the one who should
represent the People in criminal proceedings
before the Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeal is the Office of the Solicitor General.
(See Heirs of Burgos v. Court of Appeals, 8
February 2010).
39The
statement in People v. Dacudao, G.R. No. 81389, 21 February
1989, that a private offended party has no standing to challenge the grant of bail
in a special civil action for certiorari was only an obiter dictum since the Supreme
Court therein actually took cognizance of the petition filed by the offended party.

314

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

In Narciso v. Sta. Romana-Cruz, 385 Phil. 208
(2000) this Court allowed the offended party to
challenge before it the trial court's order granting
bail. But in that case, the trial court gravely abused
its discretion amounting to lack of jurisdiction in
granting bail without conducting any hearing at all.
Thus, to disallow the appeal on the basis of lack of
intervention of the OSG would "leave the private
complainant without any recourse to rectify the
public injustice.
It is not the case here. The trial court took time
to hear the parade of witnesses that the prosecution
presented before reaching the conclusion that the
evidence of guilt was not strong.
Q.

The petitioner and his wife Marinel Salvador
were charged in the RTC with estafa under
Article 315 of the Revised Penal Code. On 30
March 2011, the date scheduled for the
promulgation of the judgment, their counsel
moved for the deferment of the promulgation
inasmuch as the petitioner was allegedly
suffering from hypertension.Unconvincedof the
reason, the RTC proceeded to promulgate its
decision convicting the Petitioner and his wife
and sentencingthem to imprisonmentof 4 years
and two months of prision correctional to 20
yearsof reclusion temporal.
The RTC then issued a warrant for the
petitioner's arrest. He was apprehendedon 7
April 2011,or eight days from the promulgation
of the judgment finding him guilty. The petitioner
filed his Motion for Leave to file Notice of Appeal
dated 13 April 2011, and attached thereto the
medical certificate dated 30 March 2011
315

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

purportedly issued by Dr. Paulo Miguel A. David,
certifying that the petitioner had submitted
himself to a medical consultation at the Rizal
Medical Center on 30 March 2011 and had been
found to be suffering from hypertension. The
prosecution opposed the motion attaching the
affidavit of Dr. David stating that he never
examinedthe petitioner and that he never issued
the medical certificate dated 30 March2011.The
RTC nonetheless granted Petitioner's motion
and gave due course to the Petitioner's appeal.
The Respondent, who was the offended party,
filed a petition for certiorari with the Court of
Appeals to set aside the RTC's order granting
Petitioner's motion for leave to file notice of
appeal.The Petitionerarguesthat the Respondent
has no legal standing to assail the RTC's order
as it is only the Office of the Solicitor General
who can represent the People in proceedings
before the CA and the SC. Did the Respondent
have legal standing to assail the RTC'sorder?
A.

Yes. The Court has stressed that the People of the
Philippines, being the real party in interest in every
criminal proceedings, can be represented only by
the OSG in criminal proceedings in the CA or in the
SC. Yet, this rule admits of exceptions. A special
civil action for certiorari may be filed by an
aggrieved party alleging grave abuse of discretion
amounting to excess or lack of jurisdiction on the
part of the trial court. The term "aggrieved parties"
includes the State and the private offended party
or complainant.
There was grave abuse of discretion on the
part of the RTC since its order giving due course to
Petitioner's appeal was in clear violation of 86
316

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

R120 which requires that the accused's failure to
appeal during the promulgation was with justifiable
cause and that the accused should prove such
justifiable cause. Here the certification purportedly
issued by Dr. David was proved to be spurious.
(Salvador v. Chua, 15 July 2015, Bersamin, J.).
Q.

Petitioner was the private complainant in a
criminal case for estafa through falsification of
public documentsfiled against the Respondent.
Petitioner averred that the Respondentfalsified
his signature in a deed of sale of land and was
able to cancel Petitioner'stitle and obtain a new
title in Respondent's name in 1998. Prior to
arraignment, Respondent filed a motion to
quash on the ground of prescription which was
granted by the RTC. The RTC held that the
prescriptive period for the alleged crime
commenced from the time Petitioner had
constructive notice of the alleged falsification,
i.e., when the documentwas registeredwith the
Register of Deeds on 1 April 1998. Therefore,
since more than 10 years had elapsedwhen the
information was filed in 2013,the subject crime
had prescribed. Petitioner's motion for
reconsiderationwas denied. Petitionerfiled with
the Court of Appeals a special civil action
challenging the quashal and moving that the
case against the Respondent be reinstated.
May the Court of Appeals take cognizance of
the petition for certiorari?

A.

No. If there is a dismissal of a criminal case by the
trial court or if there is an acquittal of the accused, it
is only the OSG that may bring an appeal on the
criminal aspect representingthe People. The private
complainant or the offended party may, however,
317

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

file an appeal without the intervention of the OSG
but only insofar as the civil liability ofthe accused is
concerned. He may also file a special civil action for
certiorari even without the intervention of the OSG,
but only to the end of preserving his interest in the
civil aspect of the case.
Here Petitioner's petition for certiorari sought
for the reinstatement of the Information and/or a
ruling that the crime has not yet prescribed.
Accordingly, the same was not intended to merely
preserve his interest in the civil aspect of the case.
Thus, as his certiorari petition was filed seeking for
relief/s in relation to the criminal aspect of the case,
it is necessary that the same be filed with the
authorization of the OSG, which, by law, is the
proper representative of the People, the real party
in interest in the criminal proceedings.There being
no authorization given, the certiorari petition was
rightfully dismissed. (Burgos v. Naval, 8 June 2016,
Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

If a criminal case is dismissed by the trial court
or if there is an acquittal, may the private
offended party appeal from such dismissal?

A.

No. If the criminal case is dismissed by the trial
court or if there is an acquittal, the appeal on the
criminal aspect of the case must be instituted by the
Solicitor General in behalf of the State. The
capability of the private complainant to question
such dismissal or acquittal is limited only to the ciyjl
aspect of the case. (Rodriguez v. Gadiane, si1pra).

Q.

An information for libel was filed against
accused for putting up a website allegedly
defaming the Yuchengco family. The Regional

318

-

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Trial Court quashedthe criminal information for
libel and dismissed the case for lack of
jurisdiction, holding that the criminal information
failed to allege where the article was printed
and first published or where the offended
parties reside. The People of the Philippines,
through the private prosecutors, and with the
conformity of public prosecutor filed a Notice of
Appeal to the Court of Appeals. The CA
dismissed the appeal on the ground that the
Office of the Solicitor General had not given its
conformity to the said appeal. Was the
dismissal proper?
A.

Yes. The CA correctly dismissed the notice of
appeal interposed by petitioners against the order
of the RTC because they, being mere private
complainants, lacked the legal personality to appeal
the dismissal of the criminal case. It is well-settled
that the authority to represent the State in appeals
of criminal cases before the Supreme Court and the
CA is vested solely in the OSG which is the law
office of the Government. (Malayan Insurance Co.
v. Piccio, 6 August 2014).

Q.

Criminalcomplaintsfor falsificationof commercial
documents were filed in the RTC upon
complaint of the PDIC against the respondent
bank officers. Trial was delayedallegedlydue to
the fault of the prosecution. Respondentsfiled
a motion to dismiss on the ground of violation
of their right to a speedytrial which was denied.
This prompted them to file a petition for
certiorari before the Court of Appeals docketed
as CA-G.R. SP No. 108319. A copy of said
petition was served, however, only on the
 private complainant, i.e., the PDIC,and not the
319

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

People of the Philippines (the People), through
the Office of the SolicitorGeneral (OSG), as it
was not even impleadedas party to the case. In
a Decision dated September 28, 2011, the CA
annulled and set aside the assailed orders of
the RTC, and consequently dismissed the
criminal cases against respondents. Did the CA
act correctlyin annulling and setting aside the
RTC order?
A.

No. Respondents' certiorari petition in CA-G.R. SP
No. 108319 that sought the dismissal of the
criminal cases against them should not have been
resolved by the CA, without the People, as
represented by the OSG, having first been
impleaded. This stems from the recognition that the
People is an indispensable party to the
proceedings. While the failure to implead an
indispensable party is not per se a ground for the
dismissal of an action, considering that said party
may still be added by order of the court, on motion
of the party or on its own initiative at any stage of
the action and/or such times as are just, it remains
essential - as it is jurisdictional - that any
indispensable party be impleaded in the
proceedings before the court renders judgment.
This is because the absence of such indispensable
party renders all subsequent actions of the court
null and void for want of authority to act, not only as
to the absent parties but even as to those present.
Consequently, the CA was directed to (a) reinstate
respondents' certiorari petition, and (b) order said
respondentsto implead the People as a party to the
proceedings and thereby furnish its counsel, the
OSG, a copy of the aforementioned pleading.
(People v. Go, 24 September 2014).
320

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

Definea complaint.

A.

A complaint is a sworn written statement charging a
person with an offense, subscribed by the offended
party, any peace officer, or other public officer
(OPP) charged with the enforcement of the law
violated. (83 R110).
The complaint referred to in 83 R110 should
not be confused with the complaint filed with the
prosecutor under 83(a) R112. It refers to the
complaint filed directly with the MTC where
preliminary investigation is not required (81 [bl
R110) and to the complaint filed directly in court by
the offended party or peace officer where the
accused was arrested without warrant and an
inquest prosecutor is unavailable (86 R112).

Q.

Bankard is a credit card company engaged in
acquiring credit card receivablesfrom merchants
arising from the purchase of goods and
services by credit card holders using credit
cards issued by banks, including Solidbank.
Solidbank brought to the attention of Bankard
questionable transactions which were credited
to the accused's Solidbank credit card. It was
found out that the transactions were fictitious.
Hence Bankard was constrained to pay the
amount of the transactions to Solidbank in the
course of the settlement of the transactions
betweenBankard and Solidbank. Bankardthen
filed with the prosecutor's office a complaint for
estafa through false pretense under Article
315(2)(a)of the Revised Penal Code against the
accused. The accused contended that the
complaint against him was not subscribed by
the offended party which is Solidbank, and that
321

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Bankard, not being the offended party, has no
personality to file the complaint. Was the
accused's contention correct?
A.

No. Firstly Bankard was also an offended party
since it was undeniable that it suffered damage as
a result of the false pretense of the accused. The
offended party in Article 315(2)(a) need not be the
party against whom the false pretense is directed.
Secondly even assuming that Bankard was not
an offended party, a complaint for purposes of
preliminary investigation by the prosecutor need not
be filed by the offended party but may be filed by
any competent person, unless the offense subject
thereof cannot be prosecuted de oficio. (Francisco
v. People, G.R. No. 177720, 18 February 2009;
Ebarle v. Sucaldito, 156 SCRA 803).

Q.

When is a complaint or information sufficient?
(DADAPO)

A.

A complaint or information is sufficient if it states the
name of the 2ccused; the gesignation of the
offense given by the statute; the 2cts or omissions
complained of as constituting the offense; the name
of the Qffended party; the approximate gate of the
commission of the offense; and the Q.lace where the
offense was committed. (S6 R110).

Q.

Is a prosecutor required to indicate in the
information the number and date of issue of his
MCLE Compliance Certificate? May the court
dismiss the information in case of failure to do so?

A.

Yes the prosecutor is required to do so since an
information is a p/eadiflg. Nonetheless the court
should not dismiss the information but simply

322

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

require the investigating prosecutor to indicate the
required information. (People v. Arrojado, 9
November 2015, Peralta, J.).
Q.

How shall the complaint or information designate
the offense?

A.

The complaint or information shall state the
designation of the offense given by the statute, aver
the acts or omissions constituting the offense, and
specify its qualifying and aggravating circumstances.
(DAQA). If there is no designation of the offense,
reference shall be made to the section or subsection
of the statute punishing it. (S8 R110).

Q.

What is the cause of the accusation?

A.

It is the acts or omissions constituting the offense as
well as the qualifying and aggravating circumstances.
(S9R110).

Q.

How must the cause of the accusation be
alleged in the complaint or information?

A.

The acts or omissions complained of as constituting
the offense and the qualifying and  aggravating
circumstances must be stated in ordinary and
concise language and not necessarily in the
language used in the statute but in terms sufficient
to enable a person of common understanding to
know what offense is being charged as well as its
qualifying and aggravating circumstances and for
the court to pronounce judgment. (S9 R 110).

Q.

The accused was charged with the violation of
Section 5(b) of R.A. 7610, which punishes those
who commit lascivious conduct with a child
subjected to sexual abuse, under an information
reading as follows:

323

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

That on or about 1995 up to June 2001 at
Gerona, Tarlac, and within the jurisdiction of
this HonorableCourt, the above-namedaccused
with lewd design, did then and there willfully,
unlawfully and criminally commit acts of
lasciviousness upon the person of AAA, a
minor subjected to sexual abuse.
That accused is the stepfather of AAA who
was born on January 29, 1988.
May the accused be convicted of the crime
charged under such information?
A.

No. A reading of the allegations in the above-quoted
information would show the insufficiency of the
averments of the acts alleged to have been committed
by appellant. It does not contain the essential facts
constituting the offense, but a statement of a
conclusion of law. Thus, appellant cannot be convicted
of sexual abuse under such Information. (People v.
Pangilinan, 14 November 2011 ).

Q.

Police officer Roxas was charged with murder.
The information did not allege dwelling but the
same was proved during the trial. In imposing
the death penalty, the trial court appreciatedthe
aggravating circumstance of dwelling. Did the
trial court act properly in appreciating the
aggravating circumstance of dwelling?

A.

No. 89 R110 of the 2000 Rules on Criminal
Procedure (effective 1 December 2000) states that
the qualifying and aggravating circumstances must
be stated in the information. Hence if not stated
such circumstances cannot be appreciated against
the accused even if proved. 89 R110 being a
remedial law and being favorable to the accused, the
324

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

same can be applied retroactively to pending cases.
Thus the old rule that generic aggravating
circumstances even if not alleged but proved during
the trial may be appreciated has already been
superseded by 89 R110. The penalty of death was
thus modified to reclusion perpetua. (People v.
Roxas, G.R. No. 140762, 10 September 2003 [e.b.]).

Q. P02 Eduardo Valdez and his brother Edwin
Valdez were charged with three counts of
murder of the Sayson brothers. The information
in each count reads as follows:
That on or about the 1st day of March, 2000,
in Quezon City, Philippines, the above-named
accused conspiring together, confederatingwith
and mutually helping each other, with intent to
kill, qualified with treachery,did, then and there,
willfully, unlawfully and feloniously, assault,
attack and employ personal violence upon the
personof one FERDINAND
SAYSONY DABOCOL
[etc.] by then and there shooting him with a gun,
hitting him on his head, thereby. inflicting upon
him serious and mortal wound which was the
direct and immediatecause of his death, to the
damage and prejudice of the heirs of the said
FERDINAND
SAYSONY DABOCOL[etc.].
The Valdez brothers were convicted of
murder by the RTC which conviction was
affirmed by the CA. The brothers appealed to
the SC but subsequently Edwin withdrew his
appeal which withdrawal was approved by the
SC. May the conviction of Eduardo for murder
be reducedto one for homicide?

325

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes, Eduardo's conviction for murder may be
reduced to one for homicide.
The State must specifically aver the factual
circumstances or particular acts that constitute the
criminal conduct or that qualify or aggravate the
liability for the crime in the interest of affording the
accused sufficient notice to defend himself.
The averments of the informations to the effect
that the two accused "with intent to kill, qualified with
treachery did xxx assault, attack and employ personal
violence upon" the victims "by then and there
shooting [them] with a gun, hitting [them]" on various
parts of their bodies "which [were] the direct and
immediate cause of [their] death[s]" did not sufficiently
set forth the facts and circumstances describing how
treachery attended each of the killings. Merely
averring the killing of a person by shooting him with a
gun, without more, did not show how the execution of
the crime was directly and specially ensured without
risk to the accused from the defense that the victim
might make. Indeed, the use of the gun as an
instrument to kill was not per se treachery, for there
are other instruments that could serve the
same lethal purpose. Nor did the use of the
term treachery constitute a sufficient averment, for
that term, standing alone, was nothing but a
conclusion of law, not an averment of a fact. In short,
the particular acts and circumstances constituting
treachery as an attendant circumstance in murder
were missing from the informations. (People v.
Valdez, 18 January 2012, Bersamin, J.).40

401t
is submitted that the downgrading of Eduardo's conviction from murder
to homicide should also have benefited Edwin even if he withdrew his appeal,
since the SC's judgment is favorable and applicable to him. (See 811[a] R122.

326

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

Petitionerwas chargedwith qualified theft in an
information which alleged that the crime was
committed "sometime in the month of October
2001." The proof adduced during the trial
showed that the crime was committed in
November2001. Was the Petitioner's right to be
informed of the nature and the cause of the
accusationagainst him violated?

A.

No. The information did not have to state the precise
date when the offense was committed, as to be
inclusive of the month of "November 2001" since the
date . was not a material element of the offense. As
such, the offense of qualified theft could be alleged to
be committed on a date as near as possible to the
actual date of its commission. Clearly, the month of
November is the month right after October. (Zapanta v.
People, 20 March 2013, Brion, J.).

Q.

The accused were charged with estafa under
Article 315(1)(b) of the Revised Penal Code
under an information charging them as follows:
That on or about November 15, 2005, in
Pasig City and within the jurisdiction of this
Honorable Court, the above-named accused,
conspiring and confederating together and
helping one another,did then and there willfuly,
unlawfully and feloniously defraud Fung Hing
Kit in the following manner, to wit: the said
accused, with abuse of confidence, induced
Fung Hing Kit to invest at iGen-Portal,and the
latter invested and in fact deposited the amount
of 9.5 Million Pesos into the account of iGenPortal, once in possession of said amount, the
said accused, with abuse of confidence,
misappropriated,misapplied and converted the

327

J9JC9B0M

-------------------~--f>R1MER;;;REVIEWER  ON
REMEDIAL LAW

said amount to their own and personal use and
benefit, to the damage and prejudice of said
Fung Hing Kit in the aforesaid amount of 9.5
Million Pesos.
The RTC rendered judgment convicting the
accusedof the crime charged.Was the conviction
proper?
A.

No. Article 315( 1 )(b) requires proof of receipt by the
offender of the money, goods, or other personal
property in trust or on commission, or for
administration, or under any other obligation
involving the duty to make delivery of or to return the
same. In other words, mere receipt of the money,
goods, or personal property does not satisfy the first
element, it must be demonstrated that the character
of such receipt must either be in trust, on
commission or for administration or that the accused
has the obligation to deliver or return the same
money, goods or personal property received.
The Information itself is bereft of any indication
that accused received private complainant's money in
such manner as to create a fiduciary relationship
between them. On the contrary, the Information reads
that private complainant "invested" his money with
iGen-Portal. Hence the accused cannot be convicted
of the crime charged under such information.
(Legaspi v. People, 15 Oct 2018, Tijam, J.).

Q.

An information for illegal sale of dangerous
drugs was filed against the accused the
accusatory portion of which reads as follows:
That on or about 12:15 in the early dawn of
July 5, 2011 in Brgy. Malindong, Binmaley,
Pangasinan and within the jurisdictionof this
328

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses
Honorable Court, the above-named accused,
did, then and there, willfully and unlawfully sell
Methamphetamine Hydrochloride or "shabu", a
dangerous drug, without any authority to sell
the same.
Contrary to Section 5, Article II, of RA 9165.
Can the accused be convicted of the
violation of Section 5, Article II of R.A. No. 9165
unde such an information?
A.

No. The accused was supposedly charged with the
crime of illegal sale of dangerous drugs, defined
and penalized under Section 5, Article 11 of RA
9165 - the prosecution of which requires that the
following elements be proven: (1) the identity of the
buyer and the seller, the object and the
consideration; and (2) the delivery of the thing sold
and the payment therefor.
The Information filed against the accused,
however, makes a conclusion of law - that he
"did x x x sell" dangerous drugs - without
specifically stating 1) the identity of the buyer; 2)
the amount of dangerous drugs supposedly traded
by the accused; and 3) the consideration for the
sale. The prosecution in this case deprived the
accused of his right to be informed of the offense
charged against him. (People v. Reyes, 15 October
2018, Reyes, J.).

Q.

Petitioner was charged with estafa under Article
315(1)(b) of the Revised Penal Code. The
information charging the Petitioner reads
as follows:

329

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

That on or about the 10th day of September
2000 in the City of Dumaguete,Philippines, and
within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court,
the said accused, having obtained and received
from one Cynthia Jaime various kinds of jewelry
valued in the total amount of .P705,685.00
for the
purpose of selling the same on consignment
basis with express obligation to account for and
remit the entire proceeds of the sale if sold or to
return the same if unsold within an agreed
period of time and despite repeated demands
therefor, did, then and there willfully, unlawfully
and feloniously fail to remit proceeds of the sale
of said items or to return any of the items that
may have been unsold to said Cynthia Jaime
but instead has willfully, unlawfully and
feloniously misappropriated, misapplied and
converted the same to his/her own use and
benefit to the damage and prejudice of said
Cynthia Jaime in the aforementioned amount
of .P705,685.00.
[Emphasissupplied]
The Petitioner was convicted of the crime
charged. On appeal, the Petitioner pointed out
that the private complainant in the Information
went by the name "Cynthia Jaime," whereas,
during trial, the private complainant turned out
to be "Rita Jaime." Further, Cynthia Jaime was
never presented as witness. Hence, citing
People v. Uba, 106 Phil. 332, and United States
v. Lahay/ahoy, 38 Phil. 330, Petitioner would
insist on her acquittal on the postulate that her
constitutional right to be informed of the nature
of the accusation against her has been violated.
Is the Petitioner's argument correct?
330

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

A.

No. The variance between the allegations of the
information and the evidence offered by the
prosecution does not of itself entitle the accused to
an acquittal, more so if the variance relates to the
designation of the offended party, a mere formal
defect, which does not prejudice the substantial
rights of the accused.
Petitioner's reliance on Uba is misplaced. In
Uba, the appellantwas chargedwith oral defamation,
a crime against honor, wherein the identity of the
person against whom the defamatory words were
directed is a material element. Thus, an erroneous
designation of the person injured is material. On the
contrary, in the instant case. Petitioner was
charged with estafa, a crime against property that
does not absolutely require as indispensable the
proper designation of the name of the offended
party. Rather, what is absolutely necessary is the
correct identification of the criminal act charged in
the information.Thus, in case of an error in the
designation of the offended party in crimes against
property, 812 R110 mandates the correction of the
information, not its dismissal.
In offenses against property, if the subject
matter of the offense is generic and not
identifiable, such as the money unlawfully taken as
in Lahay/ahoy, an error in the designation of the
offended party is fatal and would result in the
acquittal of the accused. However, if the subject
matter of the offense is specific and identifiable,
such as a warrant or a check, an error in the
designation of the offended party is immaterial.

331

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Here, the subject matter of the offense does
not refer to money or any other generic property.
Instead, the information specified the subject of the
offense as "various kinds of jewelry valued in the
total amount of P705,685.00." The charge was
thereafter sufficiently fleshed out and proved by the
Trust Receipt Agreement signed by Petitioner and
presented during trial, which enumerates these
"various kinds of jewelry valued in the total amount
of PhP 705,685. Hence the error in the designation
of the offended party did not violate the Petitioner's
right to be informed of the nature and the cause of
the accusation against her. ( Senador v. People, 6
March 2013, Velasco, J.).
Q.

Can a complaint or information charge more
than one offense?

A.

No, a complaint or information must charge only
one offense. (S13 R110). A duplicitous or multiplicitous
complaint or information may be quashed upon
motion. (S3[f] R 117).

Q.

What is the rationale for the rule prohibiting
duplicitous or multiplicitouscomplaints or
informations?

A.

The rationale for the rule is to give the defendant
the necessary knowledge of the charge to- enable
him to prepare his defense. The State should not
heap upon the defendant two or more charges
which might confuse him in his defense. (People v.
Manalili, 294 SCRA 220).

332

-

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

What is the exception to the rule that a
complaint or information must charge only
one offense?

A.

The exception is when the law prescribes a single
punishment for various offenses (S13 R110). Such
offenses constitute a complex crime which must be
alleged in the complaint or information.
A complex crime is one in which a single act
constitutes two or more grave or less grave felonies,
or when an offense is a necessary means for
committing the other. (Art. 48, Revised Penal Code).

Q.

What is an amendment
information?

of a complaint or

A.

An amendment of a complaint or information is the
adding or striking out or the correction of an
allegation or the name of any party. (ASCAN)

Q.

What are the two kinds of amendments?

A.

An amendment may either be formal or substantial.
The test as to whether an amendment is only
of form is whether or not a defense under the
complaint or information as it originally stood would
be equally available after the amendment is made,
and whether or not any evidence which the
accused might have had would be equally
applicable to the amended complaint or information.
If the answer is yes, the amendment is formal, if the
answer is no, the amendment is substantial.
(People v. Degamo, 402 SCRA 133; Teehankee v.
Madayag, 207 SCRA 134 [1992]).

333

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the rule regarding amendment of a
complaint or information?

A.

Before plea
A complaint or information may be amended,
in form or in substance, without leave of court, at
any time before the accused enters his plea.
However any amendment before plea, which
downgrades the nature of the offense charged in or
excludes any accused from the complaint or
information, can be made only upon motion by the
prosecutor, with notice to the offended party and
with leave of court. The court shall state its reasons
in resolving the motion and copies of its order shall
be furnished all parties, especially the offended
party. (S14 R110).
After plea
After the plea and during the trial, a formal
amendment may only be made with leave of court
and when it can be done without causing prejudice
to the rights of the accused. (S14 R110). Substantial
amendments can never be made after the accused
has pleaded.

Q.

An information for homicidewas filed in the
RTC against Danilo Buhat, "John Doe" and
"Richard Doe". The information alleged that on
16 October 1992, Danilo Buhat, armed with a
knife, unlawfully attacked and killed one Ramon
George Yu while the said two unknown
assailants held his arms, "using superior
strength, inflicting mortal wounds which were
the direct cause of his death." Buhat was
arraigned and pleaded not guilty. Subsequently
334

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

the prosecutionmoved to amend the information
by changing the designation of the crime from
homicide to murder and by adding the
allegation that petitioner had conspired with his
co-accused in the killing. Buhat opposed the
motion to amend stating that the proposed
amendments are substantial and hence cannot
be allowed after plea.
a) Are the amendments sought to be made
substantial?
b) Would youranswer be the same if there was
no allegation of abuse of superior strength
in the information?
A.
a) No. An amendment after plea resulting in the
inclusion of an allegation of conspiracy and in the
indictment of some other persons in addition to
the original accused, constitutes a mere formal
amendment permissible even after arraignment.
Buhat undoubtedly is charged as a principal in the
killing of Ramon George Yu whom Buhat is
alleged to have stabbed while two unknown
persons held the victim's arms. The addition of the
phrase, "conspiring, confederating and helping
one another" does not change the nature of
petitioner's participation as principal in the killing.
Nor would the amendment of the designation of
the crime from homicide to murder be substantial.
"Abuse of superior strength" having already been
alleged in the original information charging homicide,
the amendment of the name of the crime to murder
constitutes a mere formal amendment permissible

335

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

even after arraignment. (Buhat v. Court of Appeals,
G. R. No. 119601, 17 December 1996).
b)

Q.

No my answer would not be the same. In such
a case the amendment changing the offense
charged from homicide to murder would be
substantial. The reason is that the amendment
would not be a simple correction but a change
in the nature of the offense charged. (Diana/do
v. Dacuycuy, 108 SCRA 736).

Samonte shot and killed Angelito. An information
for murder was filed with the RTC against
Samonte. Samonte pleaded not guilty and
invoked self-defense. Later upon evidence that
Corpus had instructed Samonte to kill Angelito,
the prosecution filed a motion for leave to admit
amended information charging Corpus and
Samonte as having acted in conspiracy in the
murder of Angelito.
a) Was the amendment including Corpus as
accused and adding the allegation of
conspiracy between him and Samonte a
substantlal or formal amendment?
b) Should the court grant the motion?

A.
a) The amendment is merely a formal one.
An amendment which does not change the
nature or the essence of the offense charged is
merely formal.
The facts alleged in the accusatory part of the
amended information are similar to that of the
original information except as to the inclusion of
Corpus as Samonte's co-accused and the insertion
336

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

of the phrase "conspiring and confederating
together." The allegation of conspiracy does not
alter the basic theory of the prosecution that
Samonte willfully and intentionally shot Angelita.
Hence, the amendment is merely formal.
b) No. Under S14 R110, after the plea and during
the trial, a formal amendment may be made
only with leave of court and when it can be done
without prejudicing the rights of the accused.
Upon
arraignment
under
the
original
information, Samonte had admitted the killing but
pleaded self-defense. While conspiracy is merely a
formal amendment, Samonte will be prejudiced if
the amendment will be allowed after his plea. His
defense and corresponding evidence will not be
compatible with the allegation of conspiracy in the
new information. Hence such formal amendment
after plea is not allowed. ( Corpus v. Pamular, 5
September 2018, Leanen, J.).
Q.

Prosecution of X for frustrated murder. After
the prosecution had rested its case, the victim
died. The prosecution filed a motion to amend
the information from frustrated murder to
murder. X objected on the ground that the
amendment was a substantial one which cannot
be allowed after plea.
a) Is the objection of X meritorious?
b) Assuming that the court allowed the
amendment of the information, is X entitled
to a preliminary investigation on the new or
amended information?

337

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
a) No the objection of X is unmeritorious. The
amendment is only a formal one since there is
an identity of offenses charged in the original
and amendment information and the change
related only to the state of execution; that is
from frustrated to consummated.
b) No. The Supreme Court held that since only a
formal amendment was involved in the second
information, a preliminary investigation is
unnecessary and cannot be demanded by the
accused. (Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA
134 [1992], e.b.).

Q. Prosecutor Artin filed an Information for
violation of R.A. 8353 (Anti-Rape Law) in
relation with R.A. 7610 ( Special Protection of
Children Against Abuse, Exploitation and
Discrimination Act) with the Regional Trial

Court against Boysie. ProsecutorArtin failed to
allege in the Information that the victim is the
niece of the accused,although the victim stated
their relationship in her Sinumpaang Salaysay.
Before the scheduled arraignment, Prosecutor
Artin formally moved for the amendmentof the
Information to include the alleged relationship.
Boysie opposed the motion arguing that the
addition of the allegation of relationship will
raise the category of the offense charged in the
original Information; thus, he is entitled to a
reinvestigation before amendment may be
allowed. If you were the prosecutor, how will
you reply to Boysie's opposition? (2013Sample
Bar Question).
338

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

A.

If I were the prosecutor, I would reply to Boysie's
opposition by arguing that the amendment of the
information was merely formal.
The Supreme Court has held that a preliminary
investigation on the amended information is
unnecessary if the amendment is merely formal.
(Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA 134).
Here the amendment is merely formal for it did
not change the designationor nature of the crime but
merely added an averment regarding relationship.
Hence Boysie is not entitled to a preliminary
investigationon the amendedinformation.

Q.

The original information charged the accused
with failure to file his income tax return thus:
That on or about the 15th day of April, 2002,
at Quezon City, and within the jurisdiction of
[the CTA] the above named accused, a duly
registered taxpayer, and sole proprietor of
"Weigh Less Center" with principal office at No.
31 Races Avenue, Quezon City, and with
several branches in Quezon City, Makati, San
Fernando and Dagupan City, did then and there,
wilfully, unlawfully and feloniously fail to file his
Income Tax Return (ITR) with the Bureau of
Internal Revenue for the taxable year 2001, to
the damage and prejudice of the Government in
the estimated amount of P1 ,089,439.08,exclusive
of penalties, surcharges and interest.
The accusedpleadednot guilty. Subsequently
the prosecutionfiled a motion for leaveto admit an
amendedinformationwhich readsthus:

339

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

That on or about the 15th day of April, 2002,
at Quezon City, and within the jurisdiction of
[the CTA] the above named accused, doing
business under the name and style of "Weigh
Less Center"/Mendez Medical Group", with
several branches in Quezon City, Muntinlupa
City, Mandaluyong City and Makati City, did
then and there, wilfully, unlawfully and
feloniously fail to file his income tax return (ITR)
with the Bureau of Internal Revenuefor income
earned for the taxable year 2001,to the damage
and prejudice of the Government in the
estimated amount of P1 ,089,439.08,exclusive of
penalties, surcharges and interest.
The accused opposed the motion on the
groundsthat the amendments
sought(underscored)
were substantial. Should the prosecution's
motion to amend the information be granted?
A.

Yes. The amendments sought are merely formal
and thus may be allowed.
Amendments that do not charge another
offense different from that charged in the original
one; or do not alter the prosecution's theory of the
case so as to cause surprise to the accused and
affect the form of defense he has or will assume are
considered merely as formal amendments.
Here, the amendments sought by the
prosecution pertains to (i) the addition of the phrase
"doing business under the name and style of
Mendez Medical Group;" (ii) the change and/or
addition of the branches of petitioner's operation;
and (iii) the addition of the phrase "for income
earned." We cannot see how these amendments
340

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

would adversely affect any substantial right of the
petitioner as accused.
Since the accused operates as a sole
proprietor from taxable years 2001 to 2003, the
accused should have filed a consolidated return in
his principal place of business, regardless of the
number and location of his other branches.
Consequently, we cannot but agree with the CTA
that the change and/or addition of the branches of
the accused's operation in the information does not
constitute substantial amendment because it does
not change the prosecution's theory that the
accused failed to file his income tax return.
The accused argues that his rights were
prejudiced by an amendment when a defense
under the original information would no longer be
available after the amendment is made, and when
any evidence the accused might have, would be
inapplicable to the Information as amended.
At first, a change in the location of branches
alleged in the information may appear to deprive the
accused of his defense in the original information, i.e.,
the accused's branches in Dagupan and San Fernando
were registered only in 2003 and were therefore
"inexistent" in 2001 . However, this is not the kind of
defense contemplated under the Rules of Criminal
Procedure, and broadly under the due process of law.
To be sure, the jurisprudential test on whether
a defendant is prejudiced by the amendment of an
information pertains to the availability of the same
defense and evidence that the accused previously
had under the original information. This test,
however, must be read together with the
341

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

characteristic thread of formal amendments, which
is to maintain the nature of the crime or the
essence of the offense charged. In the present
case, this thread remained consistently under the
amended information, alleging the accused's failure
to file his return and consequently to pay the
correct amount of taxes. Accordingly, the accused
could not have been surprised at all.
In the amended information, the prosecution
additionally alleged that accused is "doing business
under the name and style of 'Weigh Less
Center'/Mendez Medical Group."' Given the nature
of a sole proprietorship, the addition of the phrase
"doing business under the name and style" is
merely descriptive of the nature of the business
organization established by the accused as a way
to carry out the practice of his profession. As a
phrase descriptive of a sole proprietorship, the
accused cannot feign ignorance of the "entity"
"Mendez Medical Group" because this entity is
nothing more than the shadow of its business
owner - accused himself.
We agree with the prosecution that accused
has no reason to complain for the inclusion of the
phrase "Mendez Medical Group." In the ReplyAffidavit it submitted during the preliminary
investigation, the prosecution has attached copies
of accused's paid advertisements making express
reference to "Mendez Medical Group." (Mendez v.
People, 11 June 2014, Brion, J.).
Q.

Define substitution of the complaint or information.

A.

Substitution of the complaint or information is the
dismissal by the court of the original complaint or
342

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

information upon the filing of a new one charging
the proper offense, provided the accused would not
be placed in double jeopardy. (S14 R110).
Q.

When may substitution be effected?

A.

Substitution shall be effected if it appears at any
time before judgment that a mistake has been
made in charging the proper offense and the accused
cannot be convicted of the offense charged or any
other offense necessarily included therein. (S14
R110; S19 R119).

Q.

Accused was charged in an information with
rape through sexual intercourse committed
against a 15-year-old minor. The information
alleged that the accused with lewd design had
sexual intercourse with the 15-year-old minor
through force and intimidation contrary to
Article 266-A,in relation to Article 266-B,of the
RevisedPenalCode.
During the trial, the victim testified that the
accusedinserted his finger into her vagina. The
RTC convicted the accused of rape by sexual
assault since instead of a penile penetration
there was a digital penetration of the victim's
private part. On appeal, the Court of Appeals
orderedthe remand of the case to the RTC. The
CA held that although the accused was clearly
guilty of rape by sexual assault, what the trial
court should have done was to direct the state
prosecutor to file a new information charging
the proper offense, and after compliance
therewith, to dismiss the original information in
accordancewith the last paragraphof 514 R110
and 519 R119.
343

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a) Was the CA's order to remand the case
correct?
b) May the CA convict the accused instead of
rape by sexual assault based on the variance
doctrine?
A.
a) No. The last paragraph of 814 R110 and 819
R 119 are applicable only before judgment has
been rendered.
When the judgment was
reviewed by the CA, the RTC had already
rendered a judgment of conviction.
b) No. The variance doctrine allows the conviction
of an accused for a crime proved which is
different from but necessarily included in the
crime charged. Rape by sexual assault is not
necessarily included or subsumed in rape
through sexual intercourse. The accused may
however be convicted of lascivious conduct
against a child under Sec. 5(b) of R.A. No.
7610, which offense is necessarily included in
the offense charged. (People v. Caoili, 8 August
2017, e.b., Tijam, J.).
Q.

In substitution, shall the accused be discharged
from custody?

A.

No. The accused shall not be discharged if there
appears good cause to detain him. In such a case,
the court shall commit the accused to answer for
the proper offense and dismiss the original case
upon the filing of the proper information. (819
R119). The court may require the witnesses to give
bail for their appearance at the trial. (814 R110).

344

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

Accused were charge with murder before the
RTC. What would be the remedy of the accused
if during trial, they were able to show that the
alleged murders were committed in furtherance
of rebellion, and thus absorbed in the crime of
rebellion under the political offense doctrine?

A.

File a motion for substitution under S 14 R 110.
Thus, if it is shown that the proper charge against
the accused should have been simple rebellion, the
trial court shall dismiss the murder charges upon
the filing of the information for simple rebellion, as
long as accused would not be placed in double
jeopardy. (Ocampo v. Abando, 11 February 2014,
e.b., Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

Distinguish amendment of information from
substitution
of information.

A.

Both amendment and substitution of the information
may be made before or after the defendant pleads,
but they may be distinguished as follows:
AMENDMENT

SUBSTITUTION

Does not involve the
dismissal of the case.

Involves the dismissal of the
case.

May involve either formal or
substantial changes,
although after plea, only
formal amendments are
allowed.

Necessarily involves a
substantial change from the
original charge.

Amendment before plea or a
formal amendment can be
made without leave of court.

Must be made with leave of
court.

Where the amendment is
only formal, there is no need

Another preliminary
investigation is required.
345

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

for another preliminary
investioation.
As a rule, the accused need
not plea anew to the
amended charge since only
a formal amendment is
involved.

The accused must plead
anew since there will be a
new charge.

Evidence taken before the
amendment need not be
retaken.

Evidence in the original case
which is relevant to the new
case has to be retaken. This
is the reason why the court
may require witnesses to post
bail to guarantee their
appearance in the new case.

An amended information
refers to the same offense
charged in the original
information or to an offense
which necessarily includes or
is necessarily included in the
original charge; hence
substantial amendments to
the information cannot be
made over the accused's
objection, for if the original
information would be
withdrawn, the accused
could invoke double
jeopardy.

Requires or presupposes that
the new information involves
a different offense which does
not include or is not
necessarily included in the
original charge; hence the
accused cannot invoke
double jeopardy upon the
dismissal of the orlqlnal., -  
information.

(See Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA 134, 140;
S14 R110; S19 R119)
Q.

Informations for homicide were filed against
Mayor Galvez before Judge Villajuan of Branch
14 of the RTC of Malolos, Bulacan. Before
arraignment, the prosecution filed a motion to
withdraw the informations which were granted
346

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

by Judge Villajuan.Subsequentlythe prosecution
filed informationsfor murders arising out of the
same acts before Branch 10 of the RTC of
Malolos, Bulacan. The accused contends that
the withdrawal of the informations for homicide
and the filing of the informations for murder
were improper. The accused contends that
the prosecution should have moved to amend
the information in Branch 14 since the charge
for murder necessarily includes the charge
for homicide therein. Is the accused's
contention correct?
A.

No. The prosecuting attorney is given the broad
power, sole authority and discretion to enter a no/le
prosequi provided he does not act arbitrarily and
acts subject to the discretion of the court. It is quite
plausible under S14 R110 that, instead of an
amendment, an information for homicide may also
be dismissed before the accused pleads, to give
way to the filing of a new information for murder.
Although the offenses charged under the three new
informations necessarily include those charged
under the original informations, the substitution of
informations was not a fatal error. A contrary ruling
would sacrifice substantial justice for formal
nuances on the altar of procedural technicalities.
(Galvez v. Court of Appeals, 24 October 1994,
Regalado, J.).41

411t
may also be argued that since the amendment from homicide to
murder would not place the accused in double jeopardy (there having been no
plea yet}, the rule that in substitution, the new information involves a new offense
not necessarily included in or necessarily including the offense in the original
information is not applicable.

347

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

In the trial of a homicide case, the fiscal was
able to prove treacheryand evident premeditation
without objection on the part of the defense. By
reason thereof, the fiscal moved to amend the
information invoking the provisions of the
Rules of Court which allows amendment of the
pleadings to conform to the evidence. He then
filed an amended information changing the
homicide to that of murder which, however,was
vehemently objected to by the defense.
(A) Resolve the merits of the fiscal's motion to
amend.
(B) Suppose instead of allowing the amendment
prayedfor, the judge dismissed the case and
ordered the filing of a new information for
murder, is the order legally assailable?
Reasons. (85 Bar Q9).

A.
(A) The fiscal's motion to amend the information
should be denied. The provisions of 85 R10 do
not apply to criminal cases which are specifically
governed by 814 R110 under which a
substantial amendment can no longer be made
after the accused had pleaded.
Here the amendment is substantial as it seeks
to change the nature of the offense charged and
the accused had already pleaded since the case
had already reached the trial stage. Hence the
motion should be denied.
(8) Yes the order is legally assailable. Under 814
R110, the dismissal of the original information

348

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

upon the filing of a new one charging the proper
offense is subject to the proviso that the accused
would not be placed in double jeopardy.
Here the filing of a new information for murder
would place the accused in double jeopardy since
murder necessarily includes homicide.
Q.

The accused pleadednot guilty to the charge of
less serious physical injuries. Beforejudgment,
the fiscal movedthat he be allowed to file a new
information against the accused for the graver
crime of frustrated murder it appearing that the
injuries were inflicted with intent to kill. The
defense objected upon the ground that the
charge for less serious physical injuries is
included in the offense of frustrated murder and
since he had already pleaded to the lesser
charge, the filing of a new information would
constitute second jeopardy. The prosecution
replied that there would be no double jeopardy
as the complaint will be dismissed upon the
filing of the information for frustrated murder,
pursuant to 511 R11942 of the 1985 Rules on
Criminal Procedurerelevant to situations when
mistake has been made in charging the proper
offense. The fiscal argued that the fact of the
accused's intent to kill was discovered by the
prosecution and the complainant only during
the trial of the case.
a) Resolvethe motion. Reasons.
b) Suppose the intent to kill is indicated in the
affidavitsof the witnessesfor the complainant
which were the basis for the filing of the
42

Now 819 R119.

349

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

complaint, would your resolution be different
and if so, why? (87 Bar Q11 ).
A.

a) The fiscal's motion for substitution of information
should be granted.
Under 814 R110 on substitution, if it appears
at any time before judgment that a mistake has
been made in charging the proper offense, the
court shall dismiss the original information upon the
filing of a new one charging the proper offense,
provided the accused would not be placed in
double jeopardy.
Here there was a mistake in charging the
proper offense, which should have been frustrated
murder instead of less serious physical injuries, and
the filing of the new informationwould not place the
accused in double jeopardy since the graver
offense arose from facts discovered after the
accused had pleaded in the first case.43
b) No, my resolution would be different. In that
case the motion for substitution should not be
granted since the filing of the new information
would place the accused in doublejeopardy.

43Although
811 R119 (now 819 R119) apparently requires that in
substitution the accused cannot be convicted of the offense charged or any other
offense necessarily included therein, this provision should be read in conjunction
with 814 R110 which provides that substitution should not place the accused in
double jeopardy. Hence an assiduous reading of the two provisions would lead
to the conclusion that substitution is proper even if the accused can be convicted
of the offense charged in the original information or a necessarily included
offense, provided that the accused would not be placed in double jeopardy under
the new information.

350

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

The reason is that the intent to kill was known all
along to the prosecution even before the accused
pleaded to the information for less serious physical
injuries. Hence it would not fall within any of the
exceptions under 87 R117, particularly S7(b).
Q.

Upon arraignment, A pleaded not guilty to the
charge of serious physical injuries. Ten days
later, the victim died. Hence, the Fiscal moved
for the amendment of the information so as to
charge the accused with the crime of homicide.
The accused objected on the ground that he
had been put in jeopardy of being convicted of
the crime of serious physical injuries; and that
another prosecution for homicide for the same
act under an amended information would
constitute double jeopardy. The accused also
argued that the amendment is a substantial one
which cannot be made after plea. If you were
the judge, how would you resolve the motion?
Explain. (84 Bar Q1 Jed).

A.

If I were the judge, I would grant the motion to
amend the information from serious physical injuries
to homicide.
The accused's argument that he would be put
in double jeopardy is without merit since the graver
charge of homicide resulted from a supervening
fact, that is, the death of the victim after
arraignment. (S7[a] R 117).
Amendment is proper since the same is merely
formal not substantial. A substantial amendment is
one which will adversely affect a substantial right of
the accused. The accused does not have a vested
right against prosecution for a graver offense

351

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

arising from a supervening pursuant to S?(a) R117.
The reason is that there would be no double
jeopardy in such a situation. Hence no substantial
right of the accused would be adversely affected if
he is prosecuted for such graver offense.
Q.

What is the venue of a criminal action?

A.

General rule

In the court of the municipality or territory
where the offense was committed or where any of
its essential ingredients occurred.
Offense committed in a vehicle, aircraft, or
train (VAT) in the course of its trip

In the court of any municipality or territory
where said train, aircraft, or vehicle passed during
its trip, including the place of departure and
arrival. (PDA)
Offense committed on board a vessel in the course
of its voyage

In the court of the first port of entry or of any
municipality or territory where the vessel passed
during such voyage. (PF)
Crime committed outside of Phil but punishable
under Art. 2 of RPG

Court where the criminal action is first filed.
(S15R110).
Q.

What is the venue of criminal actions involving
cybercrimeoffenses?

A.

The criminal actions for violation of Section 4
(Cybercrime offenses) and/or Section 5 (Other
352

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

offenses), Chapter II of RA 10175 (Cybercrime
Prevention Act), shall be filed before the designated
cybercrime court of the province or city where the
offense or any of its elements is committed, or where
any part of the computer system used is situated, or
where any of the damage caused to a natural or
juridical person took place: Provided, that the court
where the criminal action is first filed shall acquire
jurisdiction to the exclusion of the other courts.
All other crimes defined and penalized by the
Revised Penal Code, as amended, and other
special laws, committed by, through, and with the
use of ICT, as provided under Section 6, Chapter II
of RA 10175, shall be filed before the regular or
other specialized regional trial courts, as the case
may be. (Rule on Cybercrime Warrants).
Q.

If a criminal case is filed in the wrong venue,
what is the remedy of the accused?

A.

The accused can file a motion to quash on the
ground that the court has no jurisdiction over the
offense charged. Venue in criminal cases is
jurisdictional, being an essential element of the
offense charged. (Cudia v. Court of Appeals, 284
SCRA 173 [1998]). Hence this ground may be
raised at any time, even during appeal.

Q.

A bus departed the terminal from Manila bound
for Baguio City. In Malolos during a stop-over, X
and Y boarded the bus. While the bus was on the
road in Urdaneta, Pangasinan, X and Y announced
a hold-up. They divested the passengers of their
valuables and got off in Sison, Pangasinan.
a) Where is the venue of the criminal case for
robbery?

353

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) What if X and Y committed the robbery in
Malolos, while the bus was on a stop-over.
Where is the venue of the criminal case
for robbery?
A.
a) In the court of the municipality or territory where
the bus passed during the trip, including the
place of departure and arrival. Hence the case
may be filed in Manila, Malolos, Urdaneta,
Sison, and Baguio City.
b) Malolos. If the offense was not committed in the
course of the vehicle's trip but while it was stationary
in an intermediate stop or station, or at either of its
terminal stations, the rule in S15(a) R110 applies. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 282 [9th rev. ed., 2001]).
Q.

A passenger ship departed the port of Manila
bound for the port of lloiloCity. While the ship
was in the course of its voyage off the coast of
Batangas City, X killed Y during a bar fight.
a) May the criminal case for homicide be filed
in Manila?
b) May the criminal case for homicide be filed
in lloiloCity, upon arrival thereat?

A.
a) No. Unlike S 15(b ), the place or port of departure
is not included as an alternative venue. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 219 [61h rev. ed. 1989]).44
1t

44

is submitted that the case may be filed in Manila. After all, it cannot be
gainsaid that the ship will necessarily pass through the municipal waters of

354

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

b) Yes. S 15( c) states that when the offense is on
board a vessel in the course of its voyage,
the case may be filed in the court of the first port
of entry.
Q.

In behalf of the Yuchengco family, the private
respondent filed a criminal complaint against the
petitioners before the office of the city prosecutor
of Makati. The private respondent in his complaint
averred that the petitioners had put up a website
and a blogsite were they posted articles and
statements that libeled Ambassador Yuchengco.
The informations for libel were subsequently filed
with the RTC of Makati City and averred that the
defamatory article was first published and
accessed in Makati. Does the Makati RTC have
jurisdictionover the case?

A.

No. If the complainant is a private individual, venue
in libel cases is where he actually resides at the
time of the commission of the offense or where the
defamatory article was printed and first published.
In criminal prosecution for libel where defamatory
article was posted on a website and blogsite, an
allegation that the defamatory article was first
published and accessed in Makati is not sufficient
to vest jurisdiction upon the Makati RTC. There is
no way of determining the situs of the article's first
printing and publication. The place where the article
was first accessed cannot be equated to the first
publication. (Bonifacio v. RTC of Makati, 5 May
2010, Carpio Morales, J.).

Manila after having departed from its port. There seems to be no cogent reason
to distinguish in this regard between 15(b) and 15(c).

355

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER eN
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

An information for libel was filed with the RTC
of Manila against the accused publisher and
editors of Malaya newspaper. The information
alleged as follows:
That on April 21, 1999, in Manila City, and
within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court,
above-named accused, as publisher/writer,
executiveeditor and editor, respectivelyof Malaya
with address at Port Area, Manila City defamed
private complainantNarciso Y. Santiago,Jr., did
then and there, knowingly, willfully, unlawfully
and feloniously by writing and publishing an
article in the Malayax x x.
On certiorari, the CA ordered the dismissal
of the case stating that the information did not
allege that the libelous article was printed and
first published in Manila and thus venue could
not be laid in Manila.Was the dismissal correct?

A.

No. The information sufficiently alleged that the
article was first published in Manila. Paraphrasing
the Information, the accused, as publisher/writer,
executive editor and editor defamed Santiago on 21
April 1999, in Manila City, by writing and publishing
an article in the Malaya with address at Port Area,
Manila. It is clear that Port Area, Manila is where
the defamatory article was written and published
because that is the address of Malaya, an
unquestionably printed newspaper, wherein the
article appeared. That the Information did not
expressly state "first published" is of no moment
because the word "published" does not exclude the
first publication. (People v. Macasaet, 5 March
2018, Caguioa, J.).

356

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Q.

The accused was charged with perjury through
the making of a false affidavit under Article 183
of the RevisedPenal Code, committed allegedly
by executing a certification against forum
shopping containing a false narration. Where is
the proper venue of the perjury charge? Makati
City, wherethe certificateagainstforum shopping
was notarized, or Pasay City, where the CFS
was presentedto the trial court?

A.

Makati where the affiant subscribed and swore to
her CFS before the notary public. Perjury committed
through the making of a false affidavit under Art.
183 is committed when the affiant subscribes and
swears to his or her affidavit since it is when the
crime is consummated and all the elements of
perjury are executed. ( Union Bank v. People, 28
February 2012, e.b., Brion, J.).

Q.

The information for falsification of private
document filed with the MCTCof Jagna, Bohol,
alleged that the crime was committed in Jagna.
If the evidence adduced during the trial would
show that the crime was committed outside the
MCTC's territorial jurisdiction (i.e., Cebu City),
should the MCTC dismiss the case on the
ground of lack of jurisdiction?

A.

Yes, since the defense of lack of jurisdiction due to
improper venue may be raised at any stage of the
case. (Navaja v. De Castro, 22 June 2015, Peralta, J.)

Q.

In paymentof construction materialsdeliveredto
her, the Accused issued to the Complainant at
the Accused's office in Pampangatwo postdated
checks drawn against Metrobank, Pampanga.
The Complainant deposited the checks in her
357

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

bank account at Equitable PCIBank in Makati
City, but the checks were subsequently dishonored
by the drawee bank. The informations for the
violation of B.P. Big. 22 were filed before the
MTC of Makati City. The MTC rendered judgment
convictingthe Accused. On appeal, the Accused
argued that the judgment of conviction was null
and void since the venue was improperly placed.
The Accused contended that the checks were
issued and dishonored in Pampanga and that
the deposit of the checks is not an essential
element of the violation of B.P. Big. 22. Was
venue properly laid in Makati City, the place
where the checks were deposited?
A.

Yes. Venue of B.P. Big. 22 cases may be laid in the
place where the check was deposited. The reason is
that violations of BP 22 cases are categorized as
transitory or continuing crimes, meaning that some
acts material and essential thereto and requisite in
their consummation occur in one municipality or
territory, while some occur in another.
There is no denying, therefore, that the court of
the place where the check was deposited can be
. vested with jurisdiction to try cases involving
violations of BP 22. Thus, the fact that the check
subject of the instant case was drawn, issued, and
delivered in Pampanga does not strip off the Makati
MeTC of its jurisdiction over the instant case for it is
undisputed that the subject check was deposited at
the Makati Branch of Equitable PCIBank. The
MeTC of Makati, therefore, correctly took cognizance
of the instant case and rendered its decision in the

358

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

proper exercise of its jurisdiction. (Morillo v. People,
9 December 2015, Peralta, J.).45
Q.

AAA and BBB were married in 2006. BBB
started working in Singapore as a chef in 2007
and he acquired permanent residency status
there. In Singapore,he also began an affair with
a Singaporean woman with whom he was
cohabiting. He was charged in an information
before the RTC of Pasig City, where AAA
resides, with the violation of Section 5(i) of RA
9262, that is, the crime of causing mental and
emotional anguish to his wife. May Philippine
courts exercise jurisdiction over an offense
constituting psychological violence under
Republic Act No. 9262, otherwise known as the
Anti-ViolenceAgainst Women and their Children
Act of 2004, committed through marital
infidelity, when the alleged illicit relationship
occurred or is occurring outside the country?

A.

Yes. Section 7 of R.A.. No. 9262 on venue
undoubtedly pertains to jurisdiction. As correctly
pointed out by AAA, Section 7 provides that the
case may be filed where the crime or any of its
elements was committed at the option of the
complainant. While the psychological violence as
the means employed by the perpetrator is certainly
an indispensable element of the offense, equally
essential also is the element of mental or emotional
anguish which is personal to the complainant. What

45The
ruling deserves serious re-examination. The violation of B.P. Big.
22 cannot be considered as continuing since the offense was already
consummated by the dishonor of the check. After the dishonor, it cannot be said
that the accused is still continuing to commit the offense of the violation of B.P.
Big. 22. As to the place where the check was deposited, the deposit of the check
is not an essential element of the offense. It is the dishonor of the check which
is, and the situs thereof lies in the place where the drawee bank is situated.

359

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

R.A. No. 9262 criminalizes is not the marital
infidelity per se but the psychological violence
causing mental or emotional suffering on the wife.
Thus, the mental or emotional suffering of the victim
is an essential and distinct element in the
commission of the offense. (AAA v. BBB, 11
January 2018, Tijam, J.).
Q.

Fitcoin, Inc., through its President AB, with
office in the United Kingdom, is offering bit
coins or cyber currency through the internet to
British expats in the Philippines.AB resides in
Birminghan, U.K. The brochure of Fitcoin
promisesthat the bit coins will increasein value
in a short time. Mr. C, who is residing in the
Philippines, bought bit coins from Fitcoin, Inc.
The bit coins instead of increasing in value
depreciatedby more than half. MayMr._C file-a -----complaint in the Philippines against Fitcoin
and AB for selling unregistered securities in
the Philippines?

A. Yes. Under Section 21 of the Cybercrime
Prevention Act (CPA), jurisdiction shall lie with the
RTC if any of the elements of the violation of the
CPA was committed within the Philippines or
committed with the use of any computer system
wholly or partly situated in the country, or when by
such commission any damage is caused to a
natural or juridical person, who at the time of the
commission, was in the Philippines. Section 6 of
the CPA provides that all crimes defined by the
Revised Penal Code or by special laws, if
committed by, through, and with the use of
information and communicationstechnologies shall
be covered by the relevant provisionsof the CPA.
360

J9JC9B0M

Rule 110
Prosecution Of Offenses

Here Fitcoin's act of offering the bitcoins,
which are securities, violated Section 8.1, in
relation to Section 73, of the Securities Regulation
Code, and was committed by the use of the
internet, an information and communications
technology and it caused damage to Mr. C who at
the time of the commission of the offense was in
the Philippines. Hence the RTC had jurisdiction.

361

J9JC9B0M

RULE 111. PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION
Q.

State the rule on institution of the civil action
with the criminal action.

A.

When a criminal action is instituted, the civil action
for the recovery of civil liability arising from the
offense charqed'" shall be deemed instituted with
the criminal action unless the offended party waives
the civil action, reserves the right to institute it
separately, or institutes it prior to the criminal
action. (S1[a] R111).
The criminal action for violation of Batas
Pambansa Big. 22 shall be deemed to include the
corresponding civil action. No reservation to file
such civil action separately shall be allowed. ( S1[b]
R111 ).

Special Rule for cases falling under the jurisdiction
of the Sandiganbayan or RTC/MTC pursuant to Section
4 of P.O. No. 1606.
The criminal action and the corresponding civil
action for the recovery of civil liability shall at all
times be simultaneously instituted with, and jointly
determined in, the same proceeding by the
Sandiganbayan or the appropriate courts, the filing
of the criminal action being deemed to necessarily
carry with it the filing of the civil action, and no right
to reserve the filing of such civil action separately
from the criminal action shall be recognized.

46Civil
liability arising from the offense charge is also referred to as civil
liability ex delicto.

362

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q.

Up to when may the offended party reserve the
right to institute separately the civil action?

A.

The reservation of the right to institute separately
the civil action shall be made before the
prosecution starts presenting its evidence and
under circumstances affording the offended party a
reasonable opportunity to make such reservation.
(S1[a] R110).
When the accused unexpectedlypleaded guilty
to the offense charged during the arraignment, the
offended party should still be afforded a reasonable
time therefrom to make the reservation.(See Reyes
v. Sempio-Diy, G.R. No. 71914, 29 January 1986).

Q.

Does the extinction of the penal action carry
with it the extinction of the civil action?

A.

No. However, the civil action based on delict may
be deemed extinguished if there is a finding in the
final judgment in the criminal action that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did
not exist. (S2 R111 ).

Q.

Maximawas engaged in the sale of jewelry and
sustained business relations with Roman and
Magdalenawho, especially Magdalena,used to
receive pieces of jewelry from Maxima for sale
on commission.It was understoodthat Magdalena
may in turn entrust the jewels to a third party to
sell. Magdalenathrough Roman received from
Maxima for sale, several pieces of jewelry,
among them the jewelry in question valued at
P150,000.Said jewelry was later entrusted by
Magdalena to Eugenia for sale. Eugenia
absconded with said jewelry and failed to
account for it to Magdalena.
363

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Maximademandedof Magdalenaand Roman
the return of the jewelry or its value but the latter
were unable to comply with the demands.
Thereafter, a criminal complaint for estafa was
filed against Romanand Magdalena. Romanwas
acquitted of the charges on the ground that he
merely acted as agent of Magdalenawho was the
person who had business dealings with Maxima.
Magdalenawas also acquitted on the ground that
there was no misappropriation or conversion on
her part because she had entrusted the jewelry
to Eugenia who was the one who actually made
off with it.
a) May the court in its decision impose civil
liability against Roman?
b) May the court in its decision impose civil
liability against Magdalena?
A.
a) No, the court in its decision may not impose civil
liability against Roman.
Under S2 R111, the extinction of the penal
action also results in the extinction of the civil
liability based on delict if there is a finding in the
final judgment that the act or omission from which
the civil liability may arise did not exist.
Here the acquittal of Roman extinguished his
civil liability because the decision acquitting him
expressly said that he merely acted as an agent of
Magdalena and consequently was in no way
responsible. In effect there was a finding in the
final judgment that the act or omission from which
the civil liability may arise did not exist.

364

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

b) Yes, the court in its decision may impose civil
liability against Magdalena.
The acquittal of Magdalena of the charge of
estafa in the criminal case did not extinguish her
civil liability. The reason was that the final judgment
in the criminal case, although finding that there was
no misappropriation or conversion on Magdalena's
part, did not contain any declaration that the act or
omission from which the civil liability might arise did
not exist. On the contrary the court found that she
received the jewelry under an agreement to return it
if unsold and that therefore her responsibility was
civil rather than criminal. Hence the court may in its
judgment order Magdalena to return the ring to
Maxima or to pay her its value.47 (See De Guzman
v. Alvia, 21 February 1955).
Q.

Gabat and Ligon were charged with the crime of
robbery with homicide. The prosecution alleged
that Ligon was driving a Volkswagen Kombi with
Gabat as the passenger; that while the Kombi had
stopped during a red light, Gabat beckoned the
cigarrete vendor Rosales to the window; that
when the light turned green, Gabat grabbed the
cigarette box of Rosales, who clung to the
window to try to retrieve his box; and that Gabat
pried loose the hands of Rosales who then fell to
the road and suffered fatal injuries.
On the other hand, Gabat testified that as
Rosales was engrossed trying to give change to
Gabat, the light turned green and Ligon stepped
47The

facts of the question are based on De Guzman v. Alvia, 21 February
1955, with the modification that I have instituted the civil action ex delicto in the
criminal action, rather than making it the subject of a separate civil action as what
actually happened in De Guzman.

365

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the gas pedal; that Rosales' cigarette box
accidentally fell inside the Kombi, that Ligon
continued driving despite Gabat's telling him to
stop; that Rosales clung to the Kombi's window
but lost his grip and fell to the pavement; and
that he told Ligon to stop and help Rosales but
Ligon drove off telling him that they should
proceed to Las Pinas and tell Gabat's parents
what had happened.
Only Gabat was arrested. Ligon becamea
fugitive and was never caught. After trial, Gabat
was convicted. On appeal however he was
acquitted on the ground of reasonabledoubt, the
appellatecourt finding the prosecutionwitness's
testimony not worthy of full credence. However
the appellate court in the same judgment of
acquittal found Gabat civilly liable in damages
pursuant to Article 2176of the Civil Code on the
finding that there was negligence on his part
which led to the death of Rosales. Was it proper
for the court to make a determinationthat Gabat
was civilly liable?
A.

Yes. The extinction of the penal action does not
carry with it the extinction of the civil action.
However the civil action based on delict may be
deemed extinguished if there is a finding in a final
judgment in the criminal action that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did
not exist. (S2 R 111 ).
Here while the accused was acquitted of the
crime of robbery with homicide on the ground of
reasonable doubt, the court found that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise, that
is, the negligence of Gabat, did exist. Gabat acted
366

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

negligently in calling Rosales, failing to make his
driver Ligon stop when Rosales was precariously
clinging to the Kombi, and failing to come to
Rosales' succor when he fell to the road. Hence
Gabat was liable for damages pursuant to Article
2176 of the Civil Code regarding quasi-delict. The
finding of civil liability is also in consonance with S2
(last par.) R 120 which provides that "[i]n case the
judgment is of acquittal, ... the judgment shall
determine if the act or omission from which the civil
liability might arise did not exist." (People v. Ligon,
G.R. 74041, 29 July 1987, e.b., Yap, J.).
Q.

Dy was the general manager of MCC Inc. (MCCI)
Mandy, the President of MCCI,charged Dy with
estafa through misappropriation claiming that
he entrusted checks payableto cash with a total
face value of P21 million to Dy for the latter to
encash and then pay the proceeds to MCCl's
creditor bank; however Dy instead of paying the
bank, pocketed the proceeds.The RTC rendered
judgment acquitting Dy for failure of the
prosecutionto prove her guilt beyond reasonable
doubt. In its decision, the RTC found that the
understanding between Mandy and Dy was that
the latter was entitled to the proceeds of the
checks, albeit with the obligation on her part of
paying MCCl's bank loan using her own checks.
The RTC thus found that the transaction
between Mandy and Dy was really a loan.
Although it acquitted Dy, the RTCin its decision
ordered her to pay Mandy P21 million. Was it
proper for the RTCto order Dy to pay Mandy?

A.

No. When the court finds that the source of obligation
is in fact, a contract, as in a contract of loan, it takes
a position completely inconsistent with the presence
367

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of estafa. In estafa, a person parts with his money
because of abuse of confidence or deceit. In a
contract, a person willingly binds himself or herself to
give something or to render some service. In estafa,
the accused's failure to account for the property
received amounts to criminal fraud. In a contract, a
party's failure to comply with his obligation is only a
contractual breach. Thus, any finding that the source
of obligation is a contract negates estafa.
The finding, in turn, means that there is no civil
liability ex delicto.
Here Dy was acquitted by the RTC because of
the absence of the element of misappropriation or
conversion. The RTC found that Mandy delivered
the checks to Dy pursuant to a loan agreement.
Clearly, there is no crime of estafa. There is no proof
of the presence of any act or omission constituting
criminal fraud. Thus, civil liability ex delicto cannot be
awarded because there is no act or omission
punished by law which can serve as the source of
obligation. Any civil liability arising from the loan
takes the nature of a civil liability ex contractu. The
court hearing the criminal case thus has no authority
to award civil liability ex delicto. (Dy v. People, 800
SCRA 39 [2016), Jardeleza, J.).48
48The
ruling is arguable and deserves earnest re-examination. The RTC
decision explicitly stated that Dy was acquitted on the ground that the
prosecution failed to prove her guilt beyond reasonable doubt, thereby leaving
the door open to a finding as to her civil liability, as in fact the RTC so found.
Even if the judgment of acquittal was because the prosecution absolutely failed
to prove the accused's guilt, that would not necessarily preclude the court from
finding that the act or omission from which the civil liability might arise did exist.
(See 82 R120, which states "[i]n either case."). Here the omission from which
the civil liability arose, that is, the non-payment of the loan, was found by the
RTC to exist. The ruling in effect reverses the doctrines laid down by the full
court in Padilla v. Court of Appeals, 129 SCRA 558 (1984); and People v. Ligon,
G.R. 74041, 29 July 1987. Such a reversal is violative of Sec. 4(3), Art. VIII of
the 1987 Constitution. It is thus respectfully submitted that the Dy ruling should
be treated properly as pro hac vice.

368

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q.

What are the instances when the civil action for
the recovery of the civil liability arising from the
offense charged may proceed independently?

A.

In the cases provided in Articles 32, 33, 34, and
2176 of the Civil Code, an independent civil action
may be brought by the offended party.49 It shall
proceed independently of the criminal action and
shall require only a preponderance of evidence. (83
R111 ). The result of the civil action is thus
independent of the result of the criminal action.
(ARTURO M. TOLENTINO, COMMENTARIES &
JURISPRUDENCE ON THE CIVIL CODE 153
[19851). In no case however may the offended party
recover twice for the same act or omission charged
in the criminal action. (83 R111 ).

Q.

What are the cases provided for in Articles 32,
33, 34, and 2176 of the Civil Code?

A.

Liability for damages of a public officer or employee
or private individual who violates or infringes upon
the constitutional or civil rights of the offended party
mentioned in Article 32 of the Civil Code, such as
freedom of speech and of religion, and freedom
from arbitrary or illegal detention.
(Article 32,
Civil Code).
In cases of defamation, fraud, and physical
injuries (Article 33, Civil Code).

49

Article 31 of the Civil Code provides that "[w]hen the civil action is based
on an obligation not arising from the act or omission complained of as a felony,
such civil action may proceed independently of the criminal proceedings and
regardless of the result of the latter." Article 31 was included expressly as an
independent civil action in the 1964 Rules but deleted in the 1985 Rules.
Notwithstanding such deletion, the case mentioned in Article 31 doubtless
remains to be an independent civil action.

369

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

When a member of a city or municipal police
force refuses or fails to render aid or protection to
any person in case of danger to life or property,
such peace officer shall be primarily liable for
damages, and the city or municipality shall be
subsidiarily liable therefor. (Article 34, Civil Code).
Whoever by act or omission causes damage to
another, there being fault or negligence, is obliged
to pay for the damage done. (Article 2176,
Civil Code).
Q.

Is a reservation required in order to bring an
independentcivil action?

A.

No. Independent civil actions are not deemed
instituted with the criminal action and hence the
right to bring such actions need not be reserved.
(Casupananv. Laroya, 388 SCRA 28).

Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his
negligence, X hit and injured V who was
crossing the street. Lawyer L, who witnessedthe
incident, offered his legal services to V. V, who
suffered physical injuries including a fractured
wrist bone, underwentsurgery to screw a metal
plate to his wrist bone. On complaint of V, a
criminal case for RecklessImprudenceResulting
in Serious Physical Injuries was filed against X
before the Municipal Trial Court (MTC) of Sta.
Maria. Atty. L, the private prosecutor, did not
reserve the filing of a separate civil action. V
subsequently filed a complaint for Damages
against X and Y before the RegionalTrial Court
of Pangasinanin Urdanetawhere he resides. In

370

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

his "Certification Against Forum Shopping," V
made no mention of the pendencyof the criminal
case in Sta. Maria.
a) Is V guilty of forum shopping?
b) Instead of filing an answer, X and Y moved
to dismiss the complaint for damages on the
ground of litis pendentia. Is the motion
meritorious? Explain.
c) xxx
d) X movedfor the suspensionof the proceedings
in the criminal case to await the decision in
the civil case. For his part, Y moved for the
suspension of the civil case to await the
decision in the criminal case.Which of them is
correct? Explain.(10 Bar Q4).
A.

a) Vis not guilty of forum-shopping.
The Supreme Court has held that the test to
determine whether there is forum-shopping is
whether the second action may be barred by res
judicata or lis pendens.
Here the second action is one for physical
injuries and is thus an independent civil action
separate and distinct from and which shall proceed
independently of the criminal action for reckless
imprudence (Art. 33, Civil Code; 83 R111 ). Hence
there is no res judicata or lis pendens and thus no
forum-shopping.
b) No the motion is not meritorious.
There is no lis pendens since the action for
damages is one for physical injuries which is an
371

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

independent civil action separate and distinct from
the criminal action for reckless imprudence. (Art.
33, Civil Code; S3 R 111 ).
d) Both of them are not correct. The action for
damages arising from physical injuries is an
independent civil action. An independent civil
action is separate and distinct from the criminal
case and may proceed regardless of the result
in the criminal case.
Q.

Tomas was criminally charged with serious
physical injuries allegedly committed against
Darvin. During the pendency of the criminal
case, Darvin filed a separate civil action for
damages based on the injuries he had sustained.
Tomas filed a motion to dismiss the
separate civil action on the ground of litis
pendentia, pointing out that when the criminal
action was filed against him, the civil action to
recover the civil liability from the offense
charged was also deemed instituted. He
insisted that the basis of the separate civil
action was the very same act that gave rise to
the criminal action. Rule on Tomas' motion to
dismiss, with brief reasons. (17 Bar Q18)

A.

The motion to dismiss should be denied. In cases of
physical injuries, a civil action for damages, entirely
separate and distinct from the criminal action, may
be brought by the injured party. Such civil action
shall proceed independently of the criminal action
for reckless imprudence (Art. 33, Civil Code; S3
R111 ). Hence there is no litis pendentia.

372

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q. Delia sued Victor for personal injuries which
she allegedly sustained when she was struckby
a car driven by Victor. May the court receive in
evidence, over proper and timely objection by
Delia, a certified true copy of a judgment of
acquittal in a criminal prosecution charging
Victor with hit-and-run driving in connection
with Delia's injuries? Why? (02 Bar Q13a)
A.

No, the court may not receive in evidence, over the
timely objectionthat it is irrelevant,a certifiedtrue copy
of the judgment of acquittalin the criminalcase.
In cases of defamation, fraud, and physical
injuries, a civil action for damages, entirely separate
and distinct from the criminal action, may be
brought by the injured party. Such civil action shall
proceed independently of the criminal prosecution
and shall require only a preponderanceof evidence.
(Art. 32, Civil Code). The result of the civil action is
independent of the result of the criminal action.
(ARTURO M. TOLENTINO, COMMENTARIES
& JURISPRUDENCE ON THE CIVIL CODE
153 [19851).
Here the civil action was for damages arising
from physical injuries. Hence it is an independent
civil action which is separate and distinct from the
criminal action and is not affected by the outcome
of the criminal action. Thus evidence of the
judgment of acquittal is irrelevant.
The answer would still be the same even if
there is a finding in the judgment of acquittal that
the act or omission from which the civil liability may
arise did not exist. The Supreme Court has held
that the provision in the last paragraph of S2 R111

373

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the extinction of the civil action by reason of
acquittal in the criminal case refers exclusively to
civil liability ex delicto founded on Article 100 of the
Revised Penal Code. It does not apply to an
independent civil action. (Manliclic v. Calaunan, 25
January 2007).
It has also been held that a judgment in a
criminal proceeding cannot be read in evidence in
the civil action to establish any fact there determined,
even though both actions involve the same act or
omission. The reason for this rule is that the parties
are not the same and secondarily, different rules of
evidence are applicable. ~Manantan v. Court-of
0
Appeals, 29 January 2001 ).
Q.

In November 2002, Belchez was driving a
passenger bus, Mabel Tours Bus owned by
respondent San Andres. The Mabel Tours Bus
sideswiped a Toyota Revo it was overtaking.
The Mabel Tours Bus immediately swerved to
the left lane but in the process, it hit head-on
the Supreme Bus owned and registered in the
name of petitioner Supreme Bus Transportation
Line, Inc., and driven by petitioner Ruz, that was
negotiating in the opposite lane. Because of the
strong impact of the incident, the Supreme Bus
was pushed to the side of the road and the
Mabel Tour Bus continuously moved until it hit
a passenger jeepney that was parked on the
side of the road which later on fell on the canal.
Nobody died but all the vehicles were damaged.
5The

suggested answer of the UP Law Center, that the judgment may be
received in evidence if there is a finding that the act or omission from which the
civil liability may arise did not exist, overlooks the rule that an action for physical
injuries is an independent civil action and thus not governed by the last
paragraph of S2 R111 nor of Art. 29 of the Civil Code.

374

_

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

In December2002,a complaint for damages
was brought by respondent against petitioners.
Subsequently, petitioners filed their answer
with counterclaim. They alleged among others
that plaintiff has no cause of action against
them and that the proximate cause of the
vehicular accident is the reckless imprudence
of the respondent's driver Belchez.
In the course of the trial, a criminal case for
reckless imprudence resulting in damage to
property was filed against Belchez and which
resulted in Belchez's conviction. There was no
reservation of the civil action ex delicto in the
criminal case.
The RTCdismissed respondent's complaint
as well as petitioners' counterclaim. The RTC
stated that since the petitioner's did not reserve
the civil action ex delicto in the criminal case,
then it was deemed instituted in the criminal
case and thus precluded the petitioner's from
recovering damagesthrough their counterclaim.
Was the dismissal of the counterclaim correct?
A.

No. The petitioners' counterclaim is based on quasidelict under Article 2176 of the Civil Code and is
thus an independent civil action which does need to
be reserved and which shall proceed independently
of the criminal action, subject to the proscription
against double recovery under Article 2177 of the
Civil Code. ( Supreme Transporl Liner v. San Andres,
15 Aug 2018, Bersamin, J.).

Q.

While cruising on a highway, a taxicab driven
by Mans hit an electric post. As a result thereof,
its passenger, Jovy, suffered serious injuries.
375

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Mans was subsequently charged before the
Municipal Trial Court with reckless imprudence
resulting in serious physical injuries.
Thereafter, Jovy filed a civil action against
Lourdes, the owner of the taxicab, for breach of
contract, and Mansfor quasi-delict. Lourdes and
Mansfiled a motion to dismiss the civil action on
the ground of litis pendentia, that is, the
pendencyof the civil action impliedly instituted in
the criminal action for reckless imprudence
resulting in serious physical injuries. Resolvethe
motion with reasons.(05 Bar Q6).
A.

The motion to dismiss the civil action on the ground
of litis pendentia should be denied.
The civil action filed by Jovy against Lourdes is
not barred by litis pendentia since it involves a
different cause of action, that is breach of contract,
while the cause of action in the civil action ex
delicto against Mans is the latter's reckless
negligence or imprudence.
The civil action for quasi-delict filed by Jovy
against Mans is not barred by litis pendentia.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
action for quasi-delict is an independent civil action
which shall proceed independently of the criminal
action and regardless of its result and is thus not
barred by litis pendentia.

Q.

A criminal information for libel was filed against
D upon the sworn complaint of 0. 0 did not
reserve the filing of a separate civil action. After
the trial, the court renderedjudgment acquitting
D on the ground that he never uttered anything
376

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

defamatoryor libelous against O and that O just
wanted to harass D. SubsequentlyD filed a civil
case for damages with the RTC against O for
filing a malicious harassment suit. 0 filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground that the civil
case is barred since the same is a compulsory
counterclaim which should have been raised in
the criminal case.
a) How should the judge rule on the motion to
dismiss?
b) Assume that D did not file the civil case
against O but it was O who filed a civil case
for libel and damagesagainst D. D moved to
dismiss the civil case on the ground of
res judicata. Should the motion to dismiss
be granted.
A.
a) The judge should deny the motion to dismiss the
civil case.
No counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party
complaint may be filed by the accused in the
criminal case, but any cause of action which could
have been the subject thereof may be litigated in a
separate civil action. (S1 R111 ).
b) No. In cases of defamation, a civil action for
damages, entirely separate and distinct from the
criminal action, may be brought by the injured
party. Such civil action shall proceed independently
of the criminal prosecution. (Article 33, Civil Code).

377

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

State the effects of the commencement of the
criminal action upon the separate civil action.

A.

Deferment
After the criminal action has been commenced,
the separate civil action arising therefrom cannot be
instituted until final judgment has been entered in
the criminal action.
Suspension
If the criminal action is filed after the separate
civil action has already been instituted, the latter
shall be suspended in whatever stage it may be
found before judgment on the merits. The suspension
shall last until final judgment is rendered" in the
criminal action.
Consolidation
Nevertheless, before judgment on the merits is
rendered in the civil action, the same may, upon
motion of the offended party, be consolidated with
the criminal action in the court trying the criminal
action.
In case of consolidation, the evidence
already adduced in the civil action shall be deemed
automatically reproduced in the criminal action
without prejudice to the right of the prosecution52 to

51The
word "rendered" should be taken to mean as "entered." Since the
civil action ex delicto cannot be instituted until entry of final judgment in the
criminal case, by parity of reasoning the suspension of the civil action ex delicto
should also last until final judgment is entered in the criminal action.
(MANGONTAWAR M. GUBAT, THE REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ANNO. 119 [3'd Ed., 2009]).
521t
is submitted that "prosecution" should instead be changed to
"accused." It is hard to imagine that the prosecution would cross-examine the
witnesses of the offended party. The accused should however be afforded the
chance to cross-examine because of his constitutional right of confrontation.

378

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

cross-examine the witnesses presented by the
offended party in the criminal case and of the
parties to present additional evidence. The consolidated
criminal and civil actions shall be tried and
decided jointly.
Tolling of prescriptive period
During the pendency of the criminal action, the
running of the prescriptive period of the civil action
which cannot be instituted separately or whose
proceeding has been suspended shall be tolled.
(S2 R111)
Take note that these rules on deferment,
suspension, consolidation, and tolling of the
prescriptive period do not apply to independent
civil actions.
Special Rule for cases falling under the jurisdiction
of the Sandiganbayan or RTC/MTC pursuant to Section
4 of P.O. No. 1606.
Where the civil action had heretofore been filed
separately but judgment therein has not yet been
rendered, and the criminal case is hereafter filed
with the Sandiganbayan or the appropriate court,
said civil action shall be transferred to the
Sandiganbayan or the appropriate court, as the case
may be, for consolidation and joint determination
with the criminal action, otherwise the separate civil
action shall be deemed abandoned. (Sec. 4 of P.O.
No. 1606, as amended by R.A. No. 10660).

379

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

In 2014, Vishy recklessly drove his car and hit
Gindra inflictingserious physical injuries upon
her. Upon the complaint of Gindra, a criminal
information for reckless imprudence resulting
in serious physical injuries was filed in the
MeTC against Vishy. In 2018, the MeTC rendered
judgment acquitting Vishy on the ground of
reasonable doubt withoutpronouncementas to
damages. In 2019, Gindra filed with the RTC a
complaintfor damages against Vishy due to the
physical injuries she suffered in the 2014
incident. Vishy filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground of prescription, arguing that the action
had prescribed since it was brought more than
four years after the incident. Should the court
grant the motion to dismiss?

A.

Yes, the court should grant the motion to dismiss
based on prescription. Under the Rules of Criminal
Procedure, the suspension of the running of the
prescriptive period of the civil action ex delicto
during the pendency of the criminal case does not
apply to an independent civil action. (S2 R111)
Here the civil action to recover damages for
the injury to Gindra is an independent civil action
since the claim for damages arose out of physical
injuries. (Article 33, Civil Code). Thus the
prescriptive period for the action for injury or tort,
which
is
four
years,
continued
to
run
notwithstanding the pendency of the criminal case.
(Article 1146, Civil Code). Since the action was
brought in 2019 or more than four years from 2014,
the action had already prescribed.

380

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q.

Teresita filed with the RTC an action for legal
separation against her husband Froilan, with
application for support and payment of
damages.Subsequently Teresita filed with the
MTC a criminal complaint for concubinage
against Froilan. In the civil case, an application
for support pendente lite was filed by Teresita
and granted by the judge.
Froilan contends that the civil action for
legal separation and the incidents consequent
thereto,such as applicationfor supportpendente
lite, should be suspended in view of the
criminal case for concubinagefiled against him
by Teresita. Is Froilan's contention correct?

A.

No. Under 82 in relation to 81 R111, the civil action
that is suspended is one "for the recovery of civil
liability arising from the offense charged." The
action for legal separation is for the purpose of
obtaining the right to live separately, with the other
legal consequences thereof, but not for the
recovery of civil liability arising from the offense
charged. Hence such action, together with any
ancillary remedy that may be available therein such
as support pendente lite, is not suspended by the
filing of the criminal action. ( Gandionco v.
Petierende, 27 November 1987).

Q.

Ramcar Inc. filed a complaint for damages
against Respondent praying that Respondent
be orderedto pay the value of the taxi owned by
Ramcarwhich had been stolen by Respondent.
The complaint was accompanied by an
application for the issuance of a writ of
preliminary attachment, in which it is alleged
that Respondentis disposing of his properties
381

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

in fraud of creditors. Subsequently an
information for theft of the taxi was filed in
courtagainst Respondent. In the civil case, the
Respondent moved for its suspension on the
ground that the criminal case involving the
same taxi had been filed in court.
a) Should the court grant the motion to
suspend the civil action?
b) Assume that the court trying the civil case
granted the motion to suspend. May the
courtduring the period of suspension issue
the writ of preliminaryattachment?
A.

a) Yes the court should grant the motion to
suspend the civil action. Under 82 R111, if the
criminal action is filed after the civil action
arising from the offense has already been
instituted, the latter shall be suspended in
whatever stage it may be found before
judgment on the merit.
b) Yes. Even if the civil action is suspended, the
court wherein it is pending is not thereby
deprived of its authority to issue preliminaryand
auxiliary writs, such as preliminary attachment
and injunction, appointment of receiver, fixing
amounts of bonds, and other processes of
similar nature which do not go into the merits of
the case. (Ramcar, Inc. v. De Leon, 78 Phil. 449
[1947]; Sabala v. Abafio, 90 Phil. 827 [1952]).
Q.

X, the mortgagee, forciblytook the mortgaged
car of O upon the alleged failure of the latter to
pay his mortgage obligation. 0 filed against X a
382

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

civil action to recover the car. Subsequently O
filed a complaint for grave coercion against X
with the city prosecutor. X then moved for the
suspension of the civil case.
a) Should the motion to suspend be granted?
Assume that the motion to suspend was
granted. After trial, the criminal courtacquitted
X on the ground of reasonabledoubt.
b) What would happen to the suspended civil
action?
A.

a) Yes, the motion to suspend should be granted.
Under S2 R111, the civil action which was
instituted prior to the criminal action shall be
suspended upon the filing of the criminal action.
Here the civil action to recover the car arises from
the offense charged and is thus governed by the
provisions of S2 R 111. 53
b) The suspension of the civil action shall be lifted
and the case shall proceed to final judgment.
Under S2 R111, the suspension shall last until
final judgment is entered54 in the criminal action.
Q.

X, the mortgagee, forciblytook the mortgaged
car of O upon the alleged failure of the latter to
pay his mortgage obligation. 0 filed a complaint
for grave coercion with the office of the
city prosecutor.
53See

Baba/av. Abaflo, 90 Phil. 827 (1952).
word "rendered" in the second sentence of the second paragraph of
82 R11 should be read as "entered."
54The

383

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a) May O forthwith file a civil action to recover
the car from X?
The information for grave coercion was filed
in court. No reservation of the civil action was
made by 0. After trial, the criminal court acquitted
X on the ground of reasonable doubt. The
criminal court did not make any pronouncement
or findingas to the civil liabilityof X.
b) What would be the remedy or remedies of O in
order to recover or enforce the civil liability?
A.
a) No, 0 may not file a civil action to recover the
car from X. Under 82 R111, the civil action
arising from the crime cannot be instituted
until final judgment has been entered in the
criminal action.
b) The remedy of O would be to file the civil action for
the recovery of the car against X. Under 82
R111, the civil action arising from the crime may
be instituted once final judgment has been
entered in the criminal action. Likewise Article 29
of the Civil Code provides that "[w]hen the
accused in a criminal prosecution is acquitted on
the ground that his guilt has not been proved
beyond reasonable doubt, a civil action
for damages for the same act or omission may
be instituted."
O may also appeal from the civil aspect of the
judgment in the criminal case. Under 82 R120, the
judgment should have determined the accused's
civil liability and thus it was reversible error for the
criminal court not to have made such determination.
384

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q.

What is the effect of the accused's death on the
separate civilaction?

A.

The accused's death after arraignment and during
the pendency of the criminal action shall extinguish
the civil liability arising from the crime. However, the
independent civil action instituted or which
thereafter is instituted to enforce liability arising
from other sources of obligation may be continued
against the legal representative of the accused
after proper substitution or against said estate, as
the case may be. 55 The accused's heirs may be
substituted for the deceased without requiring the
appointment of an executor or administrator and
the court may appoint a guardian ad /item for the
minor heirs. (84 R111 ).

Q.

Accused, who was represented by the PAO,
was convicted by the RTC of murdering
Rolando Cueno and sentenced to suffer the
penalty of reclusion perpetua and to pay civil
indemnity to the heirs of Cueno. The PAO
appealed to the CA which affirmed the RTC's
judgment. The PAO appealed to the Supreme
Court. It was later learned that that accused
had died during the pendency of the case
before the CA.
a) Should the judgment of the CA be set aside?
b) Assuming that the CA had learned of
Cueno's death pending appeal, may it order
551t

is submitted that the independent civil actions under Articles 32, 33,
34, and 2176 of the Civil Code must be brought against the executor or
administrator or the heirs under the auspices of R87, since these actions are
based on quasi-delict or tort and essentially involve unliquidated claims for
damages. However if the accused's liability is based on contract (such as a
check or promissory note) or quasi-contract, a claim must be filed against the
estate of the deceased accused pursuant to R86.

385

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the substitution of the accused by his legal
representative or heirs?

A.
a) Yes since the criminal and civil liabilities ex
delicto of the accused were extinguished by his
death prior to final judgment.
Under the present Rules, the heirs of Cueno
should file a separate civil case in order to obtain
financial retribution for their loss. The lack of a
separate civil case for the cause of action arising from
quasi-delict56 leads to the conclusion that, a decade
after Cueno's death, his heirs cannot recover even a
centavo from the amounts awarded by the CA.
(People v. Lipata, 20 April 2016, Carpio, J.).
b) No. What the CA should do is to dismiss the
case since the criminal and civil liabilities ex
delicto of the accused have been extinguished.
The substitution referred to in S4 R 111 refers to
that made in the independent civil action which
had been instituted prior to the accused's death.
(See People v. Lipata, supra).
Q.

What is a prejudicialquestion?

A.

A prejudicial question is a question or issue raised
in a previously instituted civil action which is similar
or intimately related to the issue raised in the
subsequent criminal action and whose resolution is
determinative of whether or not the criminal action
may proceed. (S? R111 ).
56

The quasi-delict or tort is based on Article 33 of the Civil Code which
provides that "[i)n cases of defamation, fraud, and physical injuries, a civil action
for damages, entirely separate and distinct from the criminal action, may be
brought by the injured party."

386

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Q.

What are the elementsof a prejudicialquestion?

A.

The elements of a prejudicial question are: (PSD)
1) The previously instituted civil action involves an
issue similar or intimately related (sir) to the
issue raised in the subsequent criminal action.57
2) The resolution of such issue determines
whether or not the criminal action may proceed.
(S? R111 ).

Q.

What is the effect of a prejudicialquestion?

A.

It may be invoked to suspend the subsequent criminal
action. A petition for suspension of the criminal
action based upon the pendency of a prejudicial
question in a civil action may be filed in the office of
the prosecutor conducting the preliminary investigation
or in the pending criminal action at any time before
the prosecution rests. (S6 R111 ).

Q.

Carlos filed an action against Doris and Beth to
nullify the deed of sale executed by Doris in
favor of Beth, alleging that Doris had previously
sold him the same property, subject of the deed
of sale in question. Doris denied having
executed the deed of sale in favor of Carlos,
alleging in her answer that her signature in the
deed of sale to Carlos was a forgery. In view of
this, the prosecutor filed an information against
Doris for estafa for having sold the same
property twice. Doris filed a motion to suspend
the hearing of the criminal case until the civil
case has been finallydecided on the ground of

57The
word "previously" before "instituted" was inserted in an amendment
effectiveon 1 December 2000. (See A.M. No. 00-05-03-SC,dated 3 October 2000).

387

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the existence of a prejudicial question. Is the
ground relied upon by Doris tenable?Why? (82
Bar Q13).
A

Yes. A prejudicial question is a question in a
previously instituted civil action involving an issue
similar or intimately related to the issue raised in
the subsequent criminal action and whose
resolution is determinative of whether or .not -the -------criminal action may proceed.
Here the issue in the civil case is intimately
related to the issue of forgery in the criminal case
and determinative of whether the criminal case may
proceed or not. If the court resolves that Doris's
signature to the deed of sale in favor of Carlos was
a forgery, then there would be no double sale and
Doris cannot be held liable for estafa. (Ras v.
Rasul, 100 SCRA 125 [1980]).58

Q.

San Miguel Properties Inc. (SMPI) bought
several subdivision lots from BF HomesInc. BF
Homes was represented then by its receiver,
Atty. Orendain. BF Homeswithheld delivery of
20 certificates of titles, although SMPI had fully
paid for the lots, on the allegation that Atty.
Orendainwas no longer the receiver at the time
of the sale of the questioned lots. Thus on 15
August 2000, SMPIfiled a complaint-affidavit in
the Office of the City Prosecutor charging
respondent directors and officers of BF Homes
with non-delivery of titles in violation of Section
25, in relation to Section 39, of Presidential
58A

substantially similar bar question (based also on Ras v. Rasul) was
asked in the 1999 Remedial Law Bar Exam (Question No. 13[b)). This just goes
to show that bar questions based on leading or textbook cases are not
infrequently repeated in succeeding bar exams.

388

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Decree No. 957. At the same time, SMPI sued BF
Homes for specificperformance in the HLURB,
praying to compel BF Homes to release the 20
TCTs in its favor. BF Homes moved to suspend
the preliminary investigation on the ground that
the HLURB case presented a prejudicial
question. SMPI argued that the HLURB case
would not raise a prejudicial question since it
was not a civil case and since the one who filed
the HLURB case was not BF Homes but SMPI.
Should the motion to suspend on the ground of
prejudicial question be granted?
A.

Yes. The resolution of the HLURB case would
necessarily determine whether the criminal case for
failure to deliver title would proceed. If the HLURB
would determine that BF Homes was not obligated
to deliver the title because of the lack of authority of
Atty. Orendain, that would mean that the criminal
case would have no leg to stand on.
The concept of a prejudicial question involves
a civil action and a criminal case. Yet, contrary to
SMPl's submission that there could be no
prejudicial question to speak of because no civil
action where the prejudicial question arose was
pending, the action for specific performance in the
HLURB raises a prejudicial question that sufficed to
suspend the proceedings determining the charge
for the criminal violation of Section 25 of P.O. No.
957. This is true simply because the action for
specific performance was an action civil in nature
but could not be instituted elsewhere except in the
HLURB, whose jurisdiction over the action was
exclusive and original.

389

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

SMPl's submission that BF Homes could not
raise a prejudicial question as a ground for
suspension because BF Homes had not itself
initiated the HLURB case is without merit. There is
no rule that the defense of a prejudicial question
may be filed only by the party who filed or initiated
the previous case. Where the law does not
distinguish, neither should the court do so. ( San
Miguel Properties, Inc. v. Perez, G.R. No. 166836,
4 September 2013).59

Q.

The Spouses Gaditano issued checks to San
Miguel Corporationfor beer products purchased
by them on wholesale. When the checks were
deposited by SMC,they were dishonored on the
ground of insufficient funds. It turned out that
AsiaTrust Bank had extrajudicially garnished
the savings bank account of the Spouses
Gaditanowhich was used to fund their checking
account under an automatictransferarrangement.
In October 2000 the Spouses Gaditanofiled an
action for specific performance against
AsiaTrust Bank seeking the lifting of AsiaTrust
Bank's garnishment. In March 2001 SMCfiled a
criminal complaint for violation of B.P. Big. 22
against the Spouses Gaditano with the City
Prosecutor of Quezon City. The Spouses
Gaditano moved for the suspension of the
criminal proceedings pending resolution of the
action for specific performancewhich they aver
is a prejudicial question. The City Prosecutor
granted the motion of the Spouses Gaditano.

59At
the time (15 August 2000) the criminal complaint was filed, the
requirement that the civil action should be instituted previously (eff. 1 December
2000) was not yet issued by the Supreme Court.

390

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Was the resolution of the civil case for specific
performancea prejudicial question?
A.

No. The gravamen of the violation of B.P. Big. 22 is
the issuance of a worthless check. SMC had
nothing to do with the garnishment by AsiaTrust
Bank of the Spouses Gaditano's savings account.
The Spouses Gaditano should have funded the
check upon notice of dishonor. ( Spouses Gaditano
v. San Miguel Corp., 24 July 2013, Perez, J.).

Q. Solomon and Faith got married in 2005.In 2010,
Solomon contracted a second marriage with
Hope. When Faith found out about the second
marriage of Solomon and Hope, she filed a
criminal case for bigamy before the Regional
Trial Court (RTC) of Manila sometime in 2011.
Meanwhile, Solomon filed a petition for
declaration of nullity of his first marriage with
Faith in 2012,while the case for bigamy before
the RTC of Manila is ongoing. Subsequently,
Solomon filed a motion to suspend the
proceedings in the bigamy case on the ground
of prejudicial question. He asserts that the
proceedings in the criminal case should be
suspended because if his first marriage with
Faith will be declared null and void, it will have
the effect of exculpating him from the crime of
bigamy.Decide.(2014Bar Q24).
A.

Motion to suspend proceedings denied. Under the
Rules of Criminal Procedure, a requirement of a
prejudicial question is that it must have arisen from
a previously filed civil action. Here the civil action
for declaration of nullity of marriage was filed after
the criminal action for bigamy. Hence it cannot give
rise to a prejudicial question.
391

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Even assuming that the civil action for
declaration of nullity of marriage was instituted prior
to the criminal case for bigamy, the same would not
give rise to a prejudicial question. In a line of
cases, the Supreme Court has held that a spouse
cannot take the law into his own hands and
contract marriage without a previous judicial
declaration of nullity of marriage and that hence a
pending marriage nullification suit does not raise a
prejudicial question.

Q. Maria filed in October 2004 an action for
frustrated parricide against Joselito before the
Regional Trial Court of Quezon City, which was
raffled to Branch 223 (RTC Quezon City). On
February 2005, Joselito received summons to
appear before the Regional Trial Court of
Antipolo City for the pre-trial and trial of a civil
case for declaration of nullity of marriageunder
Article 36 of the Family Code on the ground
of psychological incapacity, filed by Maria
against him.
Joselito filed an urgent motion to suspend
the proceedingsbefore the RTC QuezonCity on
the ground of the existence of a prejudicial
question. Joselito asserted that since the
relationship betweenthe offender and the victim
is a key elementin parricide,the outcomeof civil
case for nullification of marriage would have a
bearing in the criminal case filed against him
beforethe RTCQuezonCity.
a) Is the resolution of the action for
nullification of. marriage a prejudicial question
that warrants the suspension of the criminal
case for frustrated parricide against Joselito?
392

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

b) Would your answer be different if the
marriage nullification case was instituted prior
to the frustrated parricide case?
A.

a) No. Firstly in order for a prejudicial question to
arise the civil action must have been instituted
prior to the criminal case, which is not the
case here.
b) No my answer would not be different. The
resolution of the issue of the nullity of the
marriage is not determinative of whether the
criminal action may proceed. The subsequent
dissolution of their marriage, in case the petition
in Civil Case No. 04-7392 is granted, will have
no effect on the alleged crime that was
committed at the time of the subsistence of the
marriage. In short, even if the marriage between
Joselito and Maria is nullified, Joselito could still
be held criminally liable since at the time of the
commission of the alleged crime, he was still
married to Maria. (Pimentel v. Pimentel, G.R.
No. 172060, 13 September 2010).
Q.

Alex filed a case for declaration of nullity of his
marriagewith Jenny, claiming that his marriage
with her was void since Jenny had a prior valid
and existing marriage with Brando. During the
pendency of the marriage nullification case,
Jenny charged Alex with bigamy, alleging that
when she married him he already had a prior
valid and existing marriage with Evita, a fact
Jenny did not know until lately.

393

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Alex moved to suspend proceedings in his
bigamy case on the ground of prejudicial
question alleging that in the event his marriage
to Jenny was declared void ab initio there
would be no second marriage to speak of.
1) If you were the judge, how would you resolve
the motion? Explain.
For Questions No. 2 and 3, assume that Jenny
had no priorvalid and existing marriage.
2) Suppose that Alex, instead of filingan action
for nullification of his marriage to Jenny,
had filed a complaint for annulment of his
marriage with Jenny on the ground that his
consent was obtained at gunpoint, would
your answer be the same? Explain.
3) Suppose that Alex, instead of filing an action
for nullification of his marriage to Jenny,
had filed a complaint for declaration of
nullityof his marriage with Evita. Could Alex
have the bigamy proceedings suspended by
invoking prejudicial question claiming that
the outcome of the bigamy case would
depend on whether there was a prior valid
and existing marriage between him and
Evita, which constitutes an element of the
crime? Explain. (95 Bar Q10 ed).60

601n
order to make the problem more challenging, I edited the question by
putting the filing of the civil action ahead of the institution of the criminal case. In
the original question, the civil action was not previously instituted. The reason
was at the time the question was asked (1995), Rule 111 did not require that the
civil case should have been previously instituted. It was only in 1 December 2000
that Rule 111 was amended to require as an element of a prejudicial question
that the civil action must have been previously instituted.

394

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

A.
1) If I were the judge, I would grant the motion to
suspend proceedings on the ground of
prejudicial question.
In order for bigamy to arise, it is required that
the second marriage would have been valid were it
not for the existence of the offender's first marriage.
(People v. Dumpo, 62 Phil. 246).
Here the civil case for nullity filed by Alex
raises a prejudicial question, since, assuming that
Alex is able to prove his case, the second marriage
would not have been valid because it was a void
bigamous marriage, Jenny having been previously
married to Brando.
2) Yes, my answer would still be the same. In a
case involving similar facts, the Supreme Court
held that the complaint for annulment of a
shotgun marriage raises a prejudicial question,
since annulment on that ground would prove
that the accused's act in contracting the second
marriage was involuntary, hence exempting
him from criminal liability. (Prado v. People, 133
SCRA 602 [1984]).
3) No. In a line of cases, the Supreme Court has held
that a spouse cannot take the law into his own
hands and contract marriage without a previous
judicial declaration of nullity of marriage and that
hence a pending marriage nullification suit does
not raise a prejudicial question.
Q.

Petitioner was validly married to X. Petitioner
then married Y. After a falling out with Y,
Petitioner filed a petition for nullificationof his
395

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

marriage to Y on the ground of psychological
incapacity under Article 36 of the Family Code.
Y then filed a criminal complaint for bigamy
against Petitioner. Petitioner filed a motion to
suspend the criminal case on the ground of
prejudicial question.
a) Should the motion to suspend the criminal
case be granted?
b) Assume that the motion to suspend was
not granted. During the pendency of the
criminal case, the civil court rendered
judgment declaring void ab initio the
marriage of Petitioner and Y on the ground
of psychologicalincapacityunder the Family
Code. May Petitioner still be convicted
of bigamy?
A.
a) No. The petition for declaration of nullity of
Petitioner's marriage to Y on the ground of
psychological incapacity does not raise a
prejudicial question since as will be discussed in
(b), Petitioner can still be convicted of bigamy
even if his marriage to Y was nullified under
Article 36 of the Family Code.
b) Yes. The Supreme Court held that an individual
who contracts a second marriage during the
subsistence of a valid marriage is criminally liable
for bigamy, notwithstanding the subsequent
declaration that the second marriage is void ab
initio on the ground of psychological incapacity.
Article 349 of the Revised Penal Code penalizes
the mere act of contracting a second or
subsequent marriage during the subsistence of a

396

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

valid marriage. The indelible fact is that bigamy
had already been consummated upon the
celebration of the second marriage. (See Tenebro
61
v. Court of Appeals, 18 February 2004 ).
Q.

Petitioner for himself and his mother (De la Cruz)
obtained a loan of P18 million from Unicapital
secured by a real estate mortgage on a property
allegedly owned by De la Cruz. It was later
discovered that the certificate of title over the
property was spurious and that it was registered
in the nameof another and not of De la Cruz.
In August 1999,Unicapitalsued Petitioner in
the RTC in Makati City for the recovery of a sum
of money and damages,with an application for a
writ of preliminary attachment(Makati civil case).
The complaint alleged that Petitioner and de la
Cruz had acted in a "wanton, fraudulent,
oppressive, or malevolent manner in offering as
security a property which they do not own, and
foisting to the public a spurious title."
In January 2000, the Office of the City
Prosecutor of Makati City filed against Petitioner
and De la Cruz an information for estafa through
falsification of public document in the RTC in
Makati City (Makati criminal case). Petitioner
moved to defer his arraignment in the Makati
criminal case on the ground of existence of a
prejudicial question due to the pendency of
the Makati civil case. Should Petitioner's motion
be granted?
611n

his separate opinion, Justice Jose Vitug wrote that the ground for
nullification under Article 36 is virtually sui generis, having the features of a
voidable marriage which is valid until annulled.

397

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. It is well settled that a civil action based on
defamation, fraud and physical injuries may be
independently instituted pursuant to Article 33 of
the Civil Code, and does not operate as a
prejudicial question that will justify the suspension
of a criminal case. This is because the result of the
independent civil action is irrelevant to the issue of
guilt or innocence of the accused.
A perusal of Unicapital's complaint in the
Makati civil case reveals that the action was
predicated on fraud. The complaint alleged that
Petitioner and de la Cruz had acted in a "wanton,
fraudulent, oppressive, or malevolent manner in
offering as security a property which they do not
own, and foisting to the public a spurious title." As
such, the action was one that could proceed
independently of the Makati criminal case pursuant
to Article 33 of the Civil Code and thus would not
pose a prejudicial question. (Jose-Consing v.
People, 15 July 2013, Bersamin,J.).62

Q.

Plaintiffsfiled with the RTC an action to nullify a
deed of sale over a parcel of land allegedly
executed by their parents. Plaintiffs alleged
that their parents' signatures were forged. The
Defendant alleged that the signatures were
genuine. Subsequently Plaintiffs filed a complaint
with the prosecutor for estafa through falsification
of public document against the Defendant. The
prosecutor filed the information in court.

621t
is submitted that the doctrine in this case should be re-examined.
The ruling appears to have conflated the concepts of a prejudicial question and
an independent civil action, which are distinct from each other. It is submitted that
an independent civil action may very well present a prejudicial question.
The ruling severely emasculates the concept of a prejudicial question, taking
into account that the vast majority of civil actions ex delicto are independent
civil actions.

398

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

Defendant filed a motion to suspend the
criminal case on the ground of prejudicial
question. The Plaintiffs opposed, arguing that
the action to nullify was based on fraud and
thus an independent civil action which could
not pose a prejudicial question. Is the Plaintiffs'
argument correct?
A.

No. The concept of independent civil actions finds
no application in this case. The main issue raised
in the civil case, the genuineness of the signature
of the Plaintiffs' parents appearing in the deed of
sale, is intimately related to the charge of estafa
through falsification of public document; the
resolution of the main issue in the civil case would
necessarily be determinative of the guilt or
innocence of the Defendant in the criminal case for
estafa through falsification of public document.
Hence the criminal case should be suspended.
(Domingo v. Singson, 5Apr 2017, Reyes, J.)63

Q.

State the rule on filing fees on the civil action
deemed instituted with the criminal action.

A.

When the offended party seeks to enforce civil
liability against the accused by way of moral,
nominal, temperate, or exemplary damages
(MENT) without specifying the amount thereof in
the complaint or information, the filing fees therefor
shall constitute a first lien on the judgment
awarding such damages.
Where the amount of damages, other than
actual, is specified in the complaint or information,
1t is opined that the Domingo ruling, which discounted the application of

63

the concept of independent civil action to the issue of prejudicial question, is
more in accord with the law rather than the holding in Jose-Consing.

399

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the corresponding filing fees shall be paid by the
offended party upon the filing thereof in court.
Except as otherwise provided in the Rules, no
filing fees shall be required for actual damages.

(S1[a] R111).
Special rule for BP 22 case
The criminal action for violation of Batas
Pambansa Big. 22 shall be deemed to include the
corresponding civil action. No reservation to file
such civil action separately shall be allowed. (

S 1 [b] R 111 ).
Upon the filing of the joint criminal and civil
actions in a BP 22 case, the offended party shall
pay in full the filing fees based on the amount of the
check involved, which shall be considered as the
actual damages claimed. Where the complaint or
information also seeks to recover liquidated, moral,
nominal, temperate or exemplary damages (MENTL),
the offended party shall pay the filing fees based on
the amounts alleged therein. If the amounts are not
alleged but any of these damages are later
awarded by the court, the filing fees based on the
amount awarded shall constitute a first lien on
the judgment.64

4The mandatory inclusion of the civil action to recover the amount of the

6

check in the criminal action seems to be a deprivation of a substantial right which
only the legislature can do. The action to recover the check does not arise from
crime but from contract; hence virtually treating the check as an obligation ex
delicto would deprive the offended party of substantial rights. One effect would
be to effectively shorten the action to recover the value of the check from ten
years to four years.

400

J9JC9B0M

Rule 111
Prosecution Of Civil Action

In estafa cases
In estafa cases where the offended party fails
to manifest within 15 days following the filing of the
information that the civil liability arising from the
crime has been or would be separately prosecuted,
the offended party shall pay the filing fee on the
civil liability sought. (821 [a] R141; Ramones v.
Guimoc, 13 August 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

In a prosecution for B.P. Big. 22 against the
signatory of a corporate check, may the offended
party move that the corporation be impleaded in
the B.P. 22 case?

A.

No since a corporation cannot be held criminally
liable under B.P. Big. 22. (Gosiaco v. Ching, G.R.
173807, 16 April 2009).

401

J9JC9B0M

RULE 112. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION
Q.

What is preliminaryinvestigation?

A.

Preliminary investigation is an inquiry or proceeding
to determine whether there is sufficient ground to
engender a well-founded belief that a crime has
been committed and the respondent is probably
9!!fily thereof and should be held for trial. (81 R112).

Q.

What are the four instances in the Rules of
Criminal Procedure where probable cause is
needed to be established?

A.
(1) In 81 and 3 R112: By the investigating
officer, to determine whether there is sufficient
ground to engender a well-founded belief that a
crime has been committed and the respondent is
probably guilty thereof, and should be held for trial. A
preliminary investigation is required before the filing
of a complaint or information for an offense where
the penalty prescribed by law is at least four years, two
months and one day without regard to the fine;
(2) In 86 and 9 R112:
By the judge, to
determine whether a warrant of arrest or a
commitment order, if the accused has already
been arrested, shall be issued and that there is a
necessity of placing the respondent under immediate
custody in order not to frustrate the ends of justice;
(3) In 85(b) R113: By a peace officer or a
private person making a warrantless arrest when
an offense has just been committed, and he has
probable cause to believe based on personal

402

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

knowledge of facts or circumstances that the
person to be arrested has committedit; and
(4) In 84 R126: By the judge, to determine
whether a search warrant shall be issued, and only
upon probable cause in connection with one
specific offense to be determined personally by
the judge after examination under oath or
affirmation of the complainant and the witnesses he
may produce, and particularly describing the place
to be searched and the things to be seized which
may be anywhere in the Philippines. (Estrada v.
Ombudsman, 21 January 2015).
Q.

Is a person undergoing preliminary investigation
also deemed to be under custodial investigation?

A.

No. Hence he is not entitled to the Miranda Rights.
Thus an uncounselled confession made during
preliminary investigation is admissible against him.
(People v. Omilig, 12 August 2015, Perez, J.)

Q.

When is preliminaryinvestigation required?

A.

Except in the case of a lawful warrantless arrest, a
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted
before the filing of a complaint or informationfor an
offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at
least 4 years, 2 months, and one day (4.2.1) without
regard to the fine. (81 R 112).

Q.

Who are the officers authorized
preliminaryinvestigation?

A.

The following may conduct preliminary investigation:
(PCA NaReL)
(a) Provincial or
assistants.

to conduct

City Prosecutors and their
403

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b) National and Regional State Prosecutors.
(c) Other officers as may be authorized by law.
(S2 R112)
Q.

Give examples of other officers who are authorized
by law to conductpreliminary investigation.

A.
1) The COMELEC has the exclusive power to
conduct preliminary investigation of all election
offenses punishable under the election laws and
to prosecute the same, except as may otherwise
be provided by law. (S1 R34, COMELEC Rules
of Procedure). However the Chief State
Prosecutor, all Provincial and City Prosecutors,
and/or their respective assistants are given
continuing authority, as deputies of the
COMELEC to conduct preliminary investigation
of complaints involving election offenses. (S2
R34, COMELEC Rules of Procedure).
2) The Ombudsman and his Deputies are
authorized to conduct preliminary investigation
in all cases involving public officers, whether
falling under the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan
or the regular courts.
3) Special counsel designated by the Secretary of
Justice under Section 1686 of the Revised
Administrative Code have the authority to
conduct preliminary investiation.
Q.

Does the PCGG have the authority to conduct
preliminary investigation and to file informations
for violation of the Anti-Graft Law?

404

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

A.

No. Hencethe infonnationsthat it filed are null and void.
(People v. Romualdez, G.R. 166510, 29 April 2009).

Q.

Outline in brief the procedure in conducting a
preliminary investigation.(CSC CR)

A.
(a) COMPLAINT-AFFIDAVIT.The complaint shall
state the respondent's address and shall be
accompanied by the affidavits of the
complainant and his witnesses, as well as
other supporting documents to establish
probable cause. The affidavits shall be
subscribed and sworn to before any prosecutor
or government official authorized to administer
oath, or, in their unavailability, before a notary
public, each of whom must certify that he
personally examined the affiants and that he is
satisfied that they voluntarily executed and
understood their affidavits.
(b) SUBPOENA. Within 10 days after the filing of
the complaint, the investigating officer shall
either dismiss it if he finds no ground to
continue with the investigation, or issue a
subpoena to the respondent attaching to it a
copy of the complaint and its supporting
affidavits and documents.
(c) COUNTER-AFFIDAVIT. Within 10 days from
receipt of the subpoena with the complaint and
supporting affidavits and documents, the
respondent shall submit his counter-affidavit
and that of his witnesses and other supporting
documents relied upon for his defense. The
counter-affidavitshall be subscribed and sworn
to and certified as provided in paragraph (a)
405

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

( d)

If the respondent cannot be subpoenaed or if
subpoenaed, does not submit counter-affidavits
within the 10-day period, the investigating officer
shall resolve the complaint based on the
evidence presented by the complainant.

(e)

CLARIFICATORY HEARING. The investigating
officer may set a hearing if there are facts and
issues to be clarified from a party or a witness.
The parties can be present at the hearing but
without the right to examine or cross-examine.
They may however submit to the investigating
officer questions which may be asked to the
party or witness concerned.

(f)

RESOLUTION. The investigating officer shall
determine whether or not there is sufficient
ground to hold the respondent for trial.
(S3 R112).

Q.

May the complaint-affidavitsand the supporting
affidavits filed with the prosecutor for preliminary
investigation be subscribed before a notary
public?

A.

Only if there is a showing that a prosecutor or
government official authorized to administer oath
was unavailable as required by Sec. 3(a) R112. If
there is no such showing the investigating
prosecutor should not accept such affidavits. (Lad/ad
v. Velasco, G.R. Nos. 172070-72, 1 June 2007).

Q.

Is the personal examination of the complainant
a prerequisite to a finding of probable cause in
preliminary investigation?

A.

No. If the evidence, which includes the sworn
complaint, is already sufficient to establish probable

406

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

cause (here for falsification of document), it is error
for the prosecutor to dismiss the complaint solely
on the ground that the complainant did not appear
in the clarificatory hearing directed by the
prosecutor. (Sa/es v. Adapon, 5 October 2016,
Bersamin, J.).
Q.

May the investigating prosecutor resolve the
complaint even if the respondent cannot be
subpoenaed?

A.

Yes. S3(d) R112 allows the investigating prosecutor
to resolve the complaint based on the evidence
before him if a respondent could not be
subpoenaed. As long as efforts to reach a
respondent were made, and he was given an
opportunity to present countervailing evidence, the
preliminary investigation remains valid. The rule was
put in place in order to foil underhanded attempts of
a respondent to delay the prosecution of offenses.
(Ocampo v. Abando, 11 February 2014).

Q.

The Field Investigation Office of the Office of
the Ombudsman(OMB) filed a complaint with
the OMB against former RepresentativeCagas
and petitioner Labay for their participation in
the alleged anomalousutilization of the Priority
Development Assistance Fund (PDAF). The
OMB issued an order directing the respondents
to file their counter-affidavits. Howevercopies
of the order could not be served on petitioner
despite diligent efforts at his office and last
known address because he was no longer
employed at the office and he was unknown at
the last known address. Hencethe OMB issued
a resolution finding probable cause against
Cagas and Labay. When Labay learned of the
407

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

resolution, he asked through his lawyer, for
copies of the complaint-affidavit and supporting
documents. Labay also prayed that the OMB
conduct a re-investigation. His motion for
reinvestigation was denied and the criminal case
against him was filed with the Sandiganbayan
(SB). It was only after the case had been filed
with the SB that Labay was furnished with
copies of the complaint-affidavit and supporting
documents. Labay filed a motion for reinvestigation
with the SB but this was also denied. Is Labay
entitled to a remand of the case to the OMB for
preliminary investigation?
A.

Yes. Labay's right to due process violated when he
was not furnished copy of complaint-affidavit and
attachments after he had filed a motion upon
learning of the OMB resolution. Although S3(d)
R112 provides that "if the respondent cannot be
subpoenaed the investigating prosecutor shall
resolve the complaint based on the evidence
presented by the complainant," the situation, however,
effectively changed when Labay made himself
available to the Ombudsman when he requested
access to the case records. The Ombudsman had a
clear opportunity to furnish petitioner with copies of
the complaint affidavit and its supporting documents.
His refusal to do so violated Labay's right to due
process.
The
Sandiganbayan
should
have
recognized these patent violations and ordered the
remand of the case to the Ombudsman for the
conduct of a proper preliminary investigation with
respect to petitioner Labay's participation in the
crimes charged. (Labay v. Sandiganbayan, 23 July
2018, Velasco, J.).

408

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

Q.

Wife filed a complaint-affidavit with the city
prosecutor against her husband for economic
abuse under Section S(i) of RA 9252 (VOWCHI
Act). The wife however deliberately indicated a
wrong address of her husband who thus was
unableto submit a counteraffidavitand participate
in the preliminary investigation. The prosecutor
found probable cause and filed the information
with the RTC which subsequently issued an
arrest warrant against the husband. The warrant
was returned unserved because the husband
could not be found at the given address. When
the husband learned of the filing of the case
and the issuance of the arrest warrant against
him, he filed with the RTC an urgent motion for
reinvestigation and for recall of the arrest
warrant. The motion was denied by the RTC
invoking A.M. No. 11-6-10-SC,which provides
that a motion for preliminary investigation shall
only be granted when accused was subjected to
inquest proceedings. Is the husband entitled to
a preliminary investigation?

A.

Yes. The husband's right to participate in the a
preliminary investigation was curtailed when his wife
deliberately indicated a wrong address. The right to
preliminary investigation is substantive, not merely
formal or technical. As such, to deny petitioner's
motion for reinvestigation on the basis of the
provisions of A.M. No. 11-6-10-SC would be to
deprive him of the full measure of his right to due
process on purely procedural grounds. (Palacios v.
People, 18 March 2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

409

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is the respondent in a preliminary investigation
entitled to be furnished with the counteraffidavits of his co-respondents?

A.

No. Both the Rules of Criminal Procedure and the
Rules of Procedure of the Office of the
Ombudsman require the investigating officer to
furnish the respondent with copies of the affidavits
of the complainant and affidavits of his supporting
witnesses. Neither of these Rules however require
the investigating officer to furnish the respondent
with copies of the affidavits of his co-respondents.
The right of the respondent is only "to examine the
evidence submitted by the complainant," as
expressly stated in Section 3(b), Rule 112 of the
Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure. (Estrada v.
Ombudsman, 21 January 2015).

Q.

Is hearsay admissible in determining probable
cause in a preliminaryinvestigation?

A.

Yes, probable cause can be established with
hearsay evidence, as long as there is substantial
basis for crediting the hearsay. Hearsay evidence is
admissible in determining probable cause in a
preliminary investigationbecause such investigation
is merely preliminary, and does not finally adjudicate
rights and obligations of parties. However, in
administrative cases, where rights and obligations
are finally adjudicated, what is required is
"substantial evidence" which cannot rest entirely
or even partially on hearsay evidence. (Estrada
v. Ombudsman, 21 January 2015).

410

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

Q.

Are the objections of hearsay and res inter alios
acta available in a preliminary investigation?

A.

No. The technical rules on evidence, such as
hearsay evidence and the res inter alias acta rule,
should not be rigidly applied in the course of
preliminary investigation proceedings. The reason
is that a preliminary investigation is merely
preliminary and does not finally adjudicate rights
and obligations of parties. (Estrada v. OMB, 31
July 2018, e.b., Carpio, J.).

Q.

Describe the proceedings after the investigating
officer has determined whether or not there is a
sufficient ground to hold the respondent for trial.

A.

If the investigating prosecutor finds cause to hold
the prespondent for trial, he shall prepare the
resolution and information. Otherwise he shall
recommendthe dismissal of the complaint.
The investigating prosecutor shall forward the
record of the case to the provincial or city
prosecutor or chief state prosecutor, or to the
Ombudsman or his deputy (PC COD) in cases of
offenses cognizable by the Sandiganbayan in the
exercise of its original jurisdiction.
No complaint or information may be filed or
dismissed by an investigating prosecutor without
the prior written authority of the provincial or city
prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the
Ombudsman or his deputy (S4 R112).

Q.

A state prosecutor filed an information against
the accused for the violation of the SSS Law in
failing to remit premiums. The information was
approved by the regional state prosecutor.

411

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

May the information be quashed and if so on
what ground?
A

Yes the information may be quashed on the ground
that the officer who filed the information had no
authority to do so. A regional state prosecutor has no
authority to approve the filing of an information as he
is not among the officers mentioned in 84 R112.
Since the state prosecutor did not obtain the requisite
approval under 84 R 112, he had no authority to file
the information. (Tolentino v. Paqueo, 7 June 2007; 2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 318 [61h rev. ed., 1989]).

Q.

In December 2012, the Office of the City
Prosecutor of Makati City (OCP-Makati) issued a
Resolution finding probable cause against
petitioner for violation of Section 10 of R.A. No.
7610. Consequently, an Information was filed
before the RTC charging petitioner of such
crime. Petitioner moved for the quashal of the
Information against her on the ground of lack of
authority of the person who filed the same
before the RTC. In support of her motion,
petitioner pointed out that the Information was
penned by Assistant City Prosecutor (ACP) De
La Cruz, without any approval from any higher
authority, albeit with a Certification claiming
that ACP De La Cruz has prior written authority
or approval from the City Prosecutor in filing
the said Information. In this regard, petitioner
claimed that nothing in the Information would
show that ACP De La Cruz had prior written
authority or approval from the City Prosecutor
to file or approve the filing of the Information
against her. As such, the Information must be
quashed for being tainted with a jurisdictional
412

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

defect that cannot be cured. Should the motion
to quash the information be granted and the
criminal case against the accused be dismissed?
A.

Yes. 84 R112 provides that no complaint or
information may be filed or dismissed by an
investigating prosecutor without the prior written
authority of the provincial or city prosecutor or chief
state prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his deputy.
Complaints or informations filed before the courts
without the prior written authority or approval of the
foregoing authorized officers renders the same
defective and, therefore, subject to quashal
pursuant to S3(d) R117. The filing of an Information
by an officer without the requisite authority to file
the same constitutes a jurisdictional infirmity which
cannot be cured by silence, waiver, acquiescence,
or even by express consent. Hence, such ground
may be raised at any stage of the proceedings.
Here, aside from the bare and self-serving
Certification, there was no proof that ACP De La
Cruz was authorized to file the Information before
the RTC by himself. Records are bereft of any
showing that the City Prosecutor of Makati had
authorized ACP De La Cruz to do so by giving him
prior written authority or by designating him as a
division chief or review prosecutor of OCP-Makati.
There is likewise nothing that would indicate that
ACP De La Cruz sought the approval of either the
City Prosecutor or any of those authorized pursuant
to OCP-Makati Office Order No. 32 in filing the
Information. Hence the motion to quash should be
granted and the case against the petitioner
dismissed. (Quisay v. People, 13 January 2016,
Perlas-Bernabe,J.).
413

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Pedrito and Tomas, Mayor and Treasurer,
respectively, of the Municipality of San Miguel,
Leyte, are charged before the Sandiganbayan
for violation of Section 3 (e), Republic Act No.
3019(Anti-Graft and Corrupt PracticesAct). The
information alleges, among others, that the two
conspired in the purchase of several units of
computer through personal canvass instead of
a public bidding, causing undue injury to the
municipality.
Before arraignment,the accused moved for
reinvestigation of the charge, which the court
granted. After reinvestigation, the Office of the
Special Prosecutorfiled an amendedinformation
duly signed and approved by the Special
Prosecutor, alleging the same delictual facts,
but with an additionalallegationthat the accused
gave unwarranted benefits to SB Enterprises
owned by Samuel. Samuel was also indicted
under the amendedinformation.
Before Samuelwas arraigned, he moved to
quash the amended information on the ground
that the officer who filed the same had no
authority to do so. Resolvethe motion to quash
with reasons. (09 Bar Q4)

A.

The motion to quash should be granted. Under 84
R112, no complaint or information may be filed by
an investigating prosecutor without the prior written
authority or approval of the provincial or city
prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the
Ombudsman or his deputy.
The Special Prosecutor is not mentioned
among those authorized to approve the filing of
414

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

complaints or information. Hence the Office of the
Special Prosecutor had no authority to file the
information and thus the motion to quash should
be granted.
Q.

What happens when the investigating prosecutor
recommends the dismissal of the complaint but
his recommendation is disapproved by the
provincial or city prosecutor or chief state
prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his deputy on
the ground that a probable cause exists?

A.

Where the investigating prosecutor recommends
the dismissal of the complaint but his
recommendationis disapproved by the provincial or
city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the
Ombudsman or his deputy on the ground that a
probable cause exists, the latter may, by himself,
file the information against the respondent, or direct
another assistant prosecutor or state prosecutor to
do so without conducting another preliminary
investigation. (S4 R112).

Q.

What is the remedy of a proper party who is
aggrieved by a resolution of the provincial or
city prosecutoror chief state prosecutor?

A.

He may appeal to the Secretary of Justice by filing a
petition for review. If the Secretary of Justice
reverses or modifies the resolution of the provincial
or city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor, he shall
direct the prosecutor concerned either to file the
corresponding information without conducting
another preliminary investigation, or to dismiss or
move for the dismissal of the complaint or
informationwith notice to the parties. (S4 R112).

415

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the Secretary of Justice motu proprio
reverse or modify the resolution of the
provincial or city prosecutor?

A.

Yes. (S4 R112).

Q.

May the question on whether the Secretary of
Justice committed grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction in
affirming, reversing,or modifying the resolutions
of prosecutors be the subject of a petition for
certiorari under R65?

A.

Yes, even when an administrative agency does not
perform a judicial, quasi-judicial, or ministerial
function, the Constitution mandates the exercise of
judicial review when there is an allegation of grave
abuse of discretion. (De Lima v. Reyes, 11 January
2016, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Is R65 available from a ruling of the Regional
State Prosecutor affirming, reversing, or
modifying the resolutions of prosecutors?

A.

Yes. The ruling of the Office of the Regional State
Prosecutor is already final and thus R65 is
available. (Mina v. Tandoc, 28 Jan 2019, PerlasBernabe, J.).

Q.

After the requisite proceedings,the Provincial
Prosecutor filed an Information for homicide
against X. The latter, however, timely filed a
Petition for Review of the Resolution of the
ProvincialProsecutorwith the Secretaryof Justice
who, in due time, issued a Resolutionreversing
the resolution of the Provincial Prosecutorand
directinghim to withdrawthe Information.
416

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

Before the Provincial Prosecutor could
comply with the directive of the Secretary of
Justice, the court issued a warrant of arrest
against X.
The Public Prosecutor filed a Motion to
Quash the Warrant of Arrest and to Withdraw
the Information,attaching to it the Resolution of
the Secretary of Justice. The court denied the
motion.
(a) Was there a legal basis for the court to
deny the motion?
(b) If you were the counsel for the accused,
what remedies, if any, would you pursue?
(03 Bar Q16).
A.

a) Yes, there was a legal basis for the court to
deny the motion.
The Supreme Court has held that once the
criminal complaint or information is filed in court,
any disposition of the case, including its dismissal
or continuance, lies entirely within the discretion of
the court and thus the court is not bound by the
action or findings of the Secretary of Justice.
(Crespo v. Mogul, 151 SCRA462 [1987]).
b) If I were the counsel for the accused, I would file
a motion for reconsideration and if denied I
would file a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals. This is because
the denial of the motion to quash the arrest
warrant and to withdraw the information is an
interlocutoryorder.
417

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What shall the judge do after the filing of the
complaint or information?

A.

Within 10 days from the filing of the complaint or
information, the judge shall personally evaluate the
resolution of the prosecutor and its supporting
evidence in order to determine whether there is
probable cause. After his evaluation, he has three
options: (DEW)
1) He may immediately dismiss the case if the
evidence on record clearly fails to establish
probable cause.
2) If he finds probable cause, he shall issue a
warrant of arrest or a commitment order when
the accused is already under custody by virtue
of a warrantless arrest.
3) In case of doubt on the existence of probable
cause, the judge may order the prosecutor to
present additional evidence within 5 days from
notice and the issue must be resolved within 30
days from the filing of the complaint or
information. (S5 R112).

Q.

After the trial court has issued the warrant
of arrest, is it superfluous for the accused
to file a motion for judicial determination of
probable cause?

A.

Yes. The issuance by the trial court of the warrant of
arrest upon filing of the information and supporting
papers implies the determination of probable cause
for the offense charged. S5 R 112 provides that "if
[the judge] finds probable cause, he shall issue a
warrant of arrest." It is then superfluous for the
accused to seek the judicial determination of probable
418

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

cause on the pretext that the trial court should still act
and proceed independently of the executive
determination of probable cause to charge the proper
offense. (Balindong v. Court of Appeals, 19 October
2015, Bersamin, J.).65
Q.

If the prosecutor filed the criminal case for
violation of the Comprehensive Dangerous
Drugs Act despite absence of showing that the
chain of custody of evidence was observed,
what may the court do?

A.

The court may either refuse to issue a commitment
order (or arrest warrant) or dismiss the case
outright for lack of probable cause per S5 R112.
(People v. Turematsu, 10 Apr 2019, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Informationsfor murder were filed with the RTC
against accused police officers for the murder
of 11 suspected members of the Kuratong
Baleleng Gang. The accused filed a motion for
determination of probable cause. After hearing,
Judge Yadao dismissed the action for lack of
probable cause. The prosecution argued that,
rather than dismiss the criminal action outright,
Judge Yadao should have ordered the panel of
prosecutors to present additional evidence
pursuant to SS R112. Was the prosecution's
argument correct?

A.

No. S5 R112 gives the trial court three options upon
the filing of the criminal information: (1) dismiss the
case if the evidence on record clearly failed to
establish probable cause; (2) issue a warrant of
arrest if it finds probable cause; and (3) order the

65Under
the Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases
(eff. 1 September 2017), a motion for judicial determination of probable cause is
a prohibited motion.

419

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

prosecutor to present additional evidence within
five days from notice in case of doubt as to the
existence of probable cause.
But the option to order the prosecutor to
present additional evidence is not mandatory. The
court's first option under the above is for it to
"immediately dismiss the case if the evidence on
record clearly fails to establish probable cause." It is
only "in case of doubt on the existence of probable
cause" that the judge may order the prosecutor to
present additional evidence within five days from
notice. (People v. Dela Torre-Yadao, 13 November
2012, e.b.,, Abad, J.).
Q.

An information for murder was filed with the
ParanaqueRegionalTrial Court against the PNP
Special Action Force and HighwayPatrol Group
for the murder of a father and his 7-year-old
daughter.The next day the HPGofficers filed an
omnibus motion for judicial determination of
probable cause and to hold in abeyance the
issuance of arrest warrants. The RTCdismissed
the case against the HPG officers for lack of
probable cause since none of the witnesses
saw them actually taking part in the shooting
and on its finding that the HPGacted merely as
a blocking force. Fifty days later, the OSGfiled
a petition for certiorari with the Court of
Appeals alleging grave abuse of discretion on
the part of the RTC in dismissing the case.
How should the CA act on the petition?

A.

The CA should dismiss the petition. The proper
remedy that should have taken was to appeal from
the dismissal order rendered under SS R112. The
dismissal for lack of probable cause under SS R112 is

420

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

a final order that should have been appealed
pursuant to 81 R122. It is a final order since it
disposes of the case, terminates the proceedings,
and leaves the court with nothing further to do with
respect to the case against petitioner HPG officers. In
case of permissible appeals from a final order in a
criminal action, the public prosecutor who appears as
counsel for the People in such an action and on
whom a copy of the final order is thus served, may file
a notice of appeal within the appropriate time since it
is a notice addressed to the RTC and not to the CA.
Only the Office of the Solicitor General, however, may
pursue the appeal before the CA by filing the required
appellant's brief or withdraw the same. Of course, the
People may refile the case if new evidence adduced
in another preliminary investigation will support the
filing of a new information against them. (Cajipe. v.
People, 23 April 2014).
Q.

The accused filed a motion for judicial
determination of probable cause. The notice of
hearing appended to the motion was addressed
only to the public prosecutor and the clerk of
court but not to the private offended party. Was
the notice defective?

A.

Yes. The notice of hearing must be addressed to
all parties concerned. (Anlud Metal Recycling Corp.
v. Ang, 17 August 2015, Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

May the judicial determination of probable
cause proceed even if the accused does not file
a pertinent motion?

A.

Yes. (Anlud Metal Recycling
August 2015, Sereno, C.J.).

421

Corp. v. Ang, 17

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is a judge obligated to resolve first a motion to
quash before issuing an arrest warrant?

A.

No. A judge is not obligated to resolve first a motion
to quash, even if grounded on lack of jurisdiction,
before issuing an arrest warrant. Rather, S5(a) R112
requires the judge to evaluate the prosecutor's
resolution and its supporting evidence within a
limited period of only ten days, (De Lima v.
Guerrero, 10 Oct 2017, e.b., Velasco, J.).

Q.

State the constitutional provision on warrant
of arrest.

A.

The right of the people to be secure in their persons
against unreasonable seizures of whatever nature
and for any purpose shall be inviolable, and no
warrant of arrest shall issue except upon probable
cause to be determined personally by the judge
after examination under oath or affirmation of the
complainant and the witnesses he may produce,
and particularly describing the persons to be
seized. (Sec. 2, Art. 111, Constitution).

Q.

When is a warrant of arrest unnecessary?

A.

A warrant of arrest is not necessary in the following
cases: (CFS)
1) Where the accused is already under custody by
virtue of a warrantless arrest.
2) If the offense is penalized by a fine only.
3) In criminal cases governed by the Rule on
Summary Procedure. The court may however
order the arrest of the accused if he fails to
appear whenever required. (S5[c] R112).

422

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

Note: The phrase in S5(c) R112 which reads,

"if the accused is already under detention pursuant
to a warrant of arrest issued by the Municipal Trial
Court in accordance with paragraph (b) of this
section," should be deleted since it refers to the
situation under the former S6(b) wherein the MTC
judge conducting preliminary investigation may
issue a warrant of arrest. Since an MTC judge can
no longer conduct preliminary investigation, the
phrase has become anachronistic.
Q.

Does the record of the preliminary investigation
form part of the record of the case?

A.

No. However the court, on its own initiative or on
motion of any party, may order the production of
the record or any of its part when: (RE)
(a) Necessary in the resolution of the case or any
incident therein; or
(b) It is to be introduced as evidence in the case by
the requesting party. (S?[b] R112).
Take note also of the SC Guidelines on Pretrial
and Discovery effective 16 August 2004 which
mandates that the judge shall order the prosecution
to attach the records of the preliminary investigation
to the case record.

Q.

The record of the preliminary investigation was
attached to the case record. Does it form part
of the record of the case?

A.

No, unless there has been an appropriate court
order under S?(b) R112 or under the SC
Guidelines on Pretrial and Discovery effective 14
August 2004. Without such court order, the mere
fact that the record of the preliminary investigation
423

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

has been physically attached to the case record
does not mean that it is already part of the record.
Q.

After preliminary investigation, accused who
were suspected NPA members were charged in
the RTC with murder with multiple frustrated
member. The accused filed a motion with the RTC
to order the prosecutor to change the charge
from murder with multiple murder to rebellion.
After the denial of their motion, the accused went
to the Court of Appeals on certiorari. After
reviewing the record of the preliminary
investigation, the CA ruled that the provincial
prosecutor acted with grave abuse of discretion
and ordered him to file a substitute information
for rebellion. Did the CA act correctly?

A.

No. The CA may not take into account the record of
the preliminary investigation as basis for finding the
prosecutor guilty of grave abuse of discretion when
such record was not presented before the trial court
and hence was not part of the record of the case.
(S?(b) R112; Office of the Provincial Prosecutor of
Zamboanga Del Norte v. CA, G.R. 125796, 27
December 2000).

Q.

Describe the investigatory procedure in cases not
requiring a preliminary investigation and not
covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure.

A.

If complaint filed with the prosecutor
If the complaint is filed with the prosecutor, he
shall act on the complaint based on the affidavits
and other supporting documents submitted by the
complainant within 10 days from its filing. The
complaint shall comply with the requirements set
forth in S3(a) R112. The prosecutor cannot require

424

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

the submission of counter-affidavits unlike in the
full-blown preliminary investigation under 83 R112.
The prosecutor may take any of the following
actions: (FED)
(a) He may dismiss the case for want of probable
cause.
(b)

He may file the corresponding information upon
a finding of the existence of probable cause.

(c)

He may require the complainant to submit
additional evidence. (MANGONTAWAR M.
GUBAT, THE REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ANNO. 179 [3rd ed., 2009])

If complaint or information filed with the MTG
If the complaint or information is filed with the MTC,
the judge shall act on the complaint or information within
10 days after its filing. (DEWS)
1) If within the 10-day period, the judge finds no
probable cause after personally evaluating the
evidence, or after personally examining in
writing and under oath the complainant and his
witnesses in the form of searching questions
and answers, he shall dismiss the case.
2) The judge may however require the submission
of additional evidence, within 10 days from
notice,66 to determine further the existence of
probable cause.
If the judge still finds no
probable cause despite the additional evidence,
he shall within 10 days from its submission or
expiration of said period, dismiss the case.
66

Compare with 85 R112, wherein it is "5 days from notice."

425

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

3) When the judge finds probable cause, he shall
issue a warrant of arrest, or a commitment order
if the accused had already been arrested, and
hold him for trial.
4) However if the judge is satisfied that there is no
necessity of placing the accused under custody,
he may issue summons instead of a warrant of
arrest. (88 R112).67
Q.

What is the remedy of the accused if he is not
afforded a preliminaryinvestigation?

A.

If there is no preliminary investigation and the
accused, before entering his plea, draws the court's
attention to its absence, the court, instead of
dismissing the information, should remand the case
to the to the prosecutor for preliminary investigation.
(Larranaga v. Court of Appeals, 287 SCRA 581 ).

Q.

A criminal information is filed in court charging
Anselmo with homicide. Anselmo files a motion
to quash the information on the ground that no
preliminary investigation was conducted. Will
the motion be granted? Why or why not? (09
Bar Q16b)

A.

No, the motion to quash should not be granted.
The Supreme Court has held that the failure to
conduct a preliminary investigation before the filing
of an information is not a ground for a motion to
quash since it is not mentioned in 83 R117. (Rodis
v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 71404-09, 26 October
1988; Pilapil v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 101978, 7
April 1993).
67This

is a unique situation wherein a summons may issue in a criminal case.

426

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

Q.

What are the remedies of the accused where the
information was filed without a preliminary
investigationbeing conducted?

A.

The remedies of the accused are the following:
1) File a motion to remand the case to the
prosecutor's office for preliminary investigation.
The motion should be made before the accused
pleads to the information; otherwise the
objection is deemed waived. This motion is also
available where a preliminary investigation was
conducted but the accused was not given notice
thereof through no fault of his, as where the
subpoena was sent to the wrong address.
2) If the accused had been validly arrested without
a warrant, ask for a preliminary investigation,
after signing a waiver of the provisions of Article
125 of the Revised Penal Code, before the
complaint or information is filed or within 5 days
from the time he learns of the filing of the
complaintor informationagainst him. (S6 R112).
3) If the accused had been unlawfully arrested
without a warrant, file a motion to quash the
information on the ground that the court has no
jurisdiction over the person of the accused.
(S3[c] R117). The motion should be filed before
the accused pleads to the information;otherwise
the ground is deemed waived.

Q.

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituin who
has been charged under RA 3019 (Anti-Graftand
CorruptPractices Act) before the Sandiganbayan.
While Angela has posted bail, she has yet to be
arraigned. Angela revealed to you that she has
not been investigated for any offense and that it
427

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

was only when police officers showed up at
her residence with a warrant of arrest that
she learned of the pending case against her.
She wonders why she has been charged before
the Sandiganbayan when she is not in
governmentservice.
a) What "before-trial" remedy would you invoke
in Angela's behalf to address the fact that
she had not been investigated at all, and
how would you avail of this remedy?
b) What "during-trial"remedy can you use to
allow an early evaluation of the prosecution
evidence without the need of presenting
defense evidence; when and how can you
avail of this remedy? (13 Bar Q7)
A.
a) The "before-trial" remedy I would invoke in
Angela's behalf is to file a motion to remand the
case to the office of the prosecutor for preliminary
investigation. I cannot file a motion to quash the
information since absence of a preliminary
investigation is not a ground of a motion to quash
nor will it justify petitioner's release because such
defect did not nullify the information and the
warrant of arrest against her. Furthermore, the
filing of charges and the issuance of the warrant
of arrest against a person invalidly detained will
cure the defect of that detention or at least deny
her the right to be released because of such
defect. (Larranaga v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
130644, 13 March 1998).

428

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

The motion to remand the case should be
availed of before Angela enters her plea. The fact
that Angela had posted bail shall not bar her from
assailing the regularity or questioning the absence
of a preliminary investigation, provided that she
raises them before entereing her plea. (S26 R114).
b) The "during-trial" remedy that I can use to allow
an early evaluation of the prosecution evidence
without the presentation of defense evidence is
a demurrer to evidence on the ground of
insufficiency of evidence. I can avail of this
remedy by filing a motion for leave to file
demurrer to evidence within 5 days after the
prosecution rests its case and which motion for
leave shall specifically state its grounds.
Q.

What is an inquest?

A.

An inquest is a formal and summary investigation
conducted by an inquest prosecutor in cases where
a person has been arrested without a warrant and
made for the purpose of determining whether the
warrantless arrest was valid.

Q.

When a person is lawfully arrested without a
warrant for an offense which requires a
preliminary investigation, may the complaint or
information be filed in court by the prosecutor
without need of a preliminary investigation?

A.

Yes provided an inquest has been conducted by the
inquest prosecutor. In the absence or unavailability
of an inquest prosecutor, the complaint may be filed
by the offended party or a peace officer directly with
the proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the
offended party or the arresting officer or person.
429

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(S6 R112). The reason for this is that there is not
enough time to conduct a preliminary investigation
since Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code
requires that the complaint or information be filed
within 12, 18, or 36 hours from the arrest otherwise
the arresting office would be liable for delay in the
delivery of detained persons.
Q.

May the person arrested without a warrant ask
for a preliminary investigation?

A.

Yes.
Before the complaint or information is filed, the
person arrested may ask for a preliminary
investigation but he must sign a waiver of the
provisions of Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code
in the presence of his counsel. Notwithstanding
such waiver, he may apply for bail.
After the filing of the complaint or information,
the accused may ask for a preliminary investigation
within 5 days from the time he learns of the filing.
(S6 R112). A waiver is obviously no longer required
since the complaint or information had already
been filed with the court.

Q.

A detainee who had been arrested without
warrant signed a waiver of the provisions of Art.
125 as he had opted for the conduct of a
preliminary investigation pursuant to 56 R112.
Does such waiver give the State the right to
detain the person indefinitely? If not, up to
when may the detainee be detained?

430

J9JC9B0M

Rule 112
Preliminary Investigation

A.

No, the waiver does not give the State the right
to detain the arrestee indefinitely. The waiver of
Article 125 of the RPC does not vest upon the DOJ,
PPO, BJMP, and PNP the unbridled right to
indefinitely incarcerate an arrested person and
subject him to the whims and caprices of the
reviewing prosecutor of the DOJ. The waiver of
Article 125 must coincide with the prescribed period
for preliminary investigation as mandated by S6
R112. Detention beyond this period violates the
accused's constitutional right to liberty. a detainee
under such circumstances must be promptly
released to avoid violation of the constitutional right
to liberty, despite a waiver of Article 125, if the 15day period'" (or the thirty 30-day period in cases of
violation of R.A. No. 9165)69 for the conduct of the
preliminary investigation lapses. (/BP v. DOJ, 25
July 2017, e.b., Mendoza, J.).

6856
R112 states "15 days from its inception." The IBP stated that the
person cannot be detained for more than 15 days.
69Sec.
90 of the CDDA mentions "30 days from the date of their filing."

431

J9JC9B0M

RULE 113. ARREST
Q.

Define arrest.

A.

Arrest is the taking of a person into custody in order
that he may be bound to answer for the
commission of an offense. (S1 R113).

Q.

How is arrest made?

A.

An arrest is made by an actual restraint of a person
to be arrested, or by his submission to the custody
of the person making the arrest.
No violence or unnecessary force shall be
used in making an arrest. The person arrested shall
not be subject to a greater restraint than is
necessary for his detention. (S2 R113).

Q.

When may a warrantlessarrest be lawfullymade?

A.

A peace officer or a private person may, without a
warrant, arrest a person: (JPE)
(a) When, in his presence, the person to be
arrested has committed, is actually committing,
or is attempting to commit an offense; (haa)
(b) When an offense has just been committed and
he has probable cause to believe based on
personal knowledge of facts or circumstances
that the person to be arrested has committed it
Upp); and
( c) When the person to be arrested is an escaped
prisoner.
In cases falling under paragraphs (a) and (b),
the person arrested shall be forthwith delivered to
432

J9JC9B0M

Rule 113
Arrest

the nearest police station or jail and shall be
proceeded against in accordance with 86 R 112.
(85 R113)
Other instances of lawful warrantless arrest
are: (BAD)
1) ARRESTEE. If a person lawfully arrested
escapes or is rescued, any person may
immediately pursue or retake him without a
warrant at any time and in any place within the
Philippines. (813 R113).
2) BONDSMEN'S ARREST. For the purpose of
surrendering the accused, the bondsmen may
arrest him or, upon written authority endorsed
on a certified copy of the undertaking, cause
him to be arrested by a police officer or any
other person of suitable age and discretion.
(823 R114).
3) DEPART FROM PHILIPPINES. An accused
out on bail may be re-arrested without the need
of a warrant if he attempts to depart from the
Philippines without the permission of the court
where the case is pending. (Ibid.).
Q. On his way home, a member of the Caloocan
City police force witnesses a bus robbery in
Pasay City and effects the arrest of the suspect.
Can he bring the suspect to Caloocan City for
booking since that is where his station is?
Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q6a)
A.

No, the police officer cannot bring the suspect to
Caloocan City for booking on the reasoning that
that is the place where his station is.
433

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, it is
the duty of the arresting officer, whether with a
warrant or not, to forthwith deliver the person
arrested to the nearest police station or jail.
(Sections 3 and 5, Rule 113).
Here the nearest police station or jail is in
Pasay City where the suspect was arrested. Hence
the police officer should have delivered the
suspect there.
Q.

What is an arrest effected in hot pursuit?

A.

It is the warrantless arrest effected pursuant to S5(b)
R113. Under S5(b) R113 two conditions must concur
for the warrantless arrest to be valid: First. The
person to be arrested has just committed an
offense. Second. The arresting officer or person has
probable cause to believe based on personal
knowledge of facts or circumstances that the person
to be arrested has committed it. (People v. Del
Rosario, 305 SCRA 7 40).

Q.

When can we say that the person to be arrested
has just committed an offense?

A.

There must be a large measure of immediacy
between the time the offense was committed and
the time of the arrest, and if there was an
appreciable lapse of time between the arrest and
the commission of the crime, a warrant of arrest
must be secured. (People v. Del Rosario, 305
SCRA 740). Where the arrest took place a day after
the cornmisslon of the crime, it eannot be said that
an offense has just been committed. Hence the
warrantless arrest was not lawful. (People v. Del
Rosario, 305 SCRA 7 40). Where the person was
arrested two days after the discovery of the crime,
434

J9JC9B0M

Rule 113
Arrest
the arrest cannot be justified under S5(b) R 113.
(People v. Olivarez, 299 SCRA 635).
Q.

Policemen who were on patrol received a radio
call from their camp directing them to proceed
to the place of shooting. The police forthwith
proceeded to the place indicated and upon
arriving there, they found the body of the victim.
The bystanders pointed to the accused as the
one who had shot the victim. The police
then arrested the accused. Was there a valid
warrantlessarrest?

A.

Yes. The arresting officers acted on the basis of
personal knowledge of the death of the victim and
of facts indicating that the accused was the culprit
(People v. Jayson, 282 SCRA 166). Take note that
the probable cause of the arresting officer or person
is based on personal knowledge not necessarily of
the crime but of facts or circumstancesindicating that
the person to be arrested has committed the crime.

Q.

Police officers approached the accused who
was talking with another person. Upon seeing
the officers, the accused ran away. He was
arrested after a chase and drugs seized from
him. May the seized drugs be used in evidence
against the accused?

A.

No. Trying to run away when no crime has been
overtly committed, and without more, cannot be
evidence of guilt. Considering that the appellant's
warrantless arrest was unlawful, the search and
seizure that resulted from it was likewise illegal.
Thus, the alleged plastic bag containing white
crystallinesubstancesseized from him is inadmissible
435

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

in evidence, having come from an invalid search and
seizure. (People v. Edano, 7 July 2014).
Q.

Police officers arrested the accused after seeing
him in a street holding a plastic sachet. The
plastic sachet later turned out to be containing
shabu. Was there a valid warrantless arrest?

A.

No. Accused's acts of standing on the street and
holding a plastic sachet in his hands, are not by
themselves sufficient to incite suspicion of criminal
activity or to create probable cause enough to justify
a warrantless arrest. Hence the shabu seized from
him cannot be used in evidence for it was not
incidental to a valid warrantless arrest. The accused
may have waived his objection to the validity of the
arrest by failing to raise it before plea, but he did not
waive his right to object to the admissibility of the
evidence seized from him. (Dominguez v. People,
13 March 2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Two police officers were on patrol in a street
when they were approached by two teen-agers
who said that a woman with long hair and a
tattoo on her left arm had just bought shabu.
They went to the direction indicated and saw a
woman matching the description who reeked of
alcohol. She was searched and found in
possession of a sachet of shabu. She was
charged and convicted of illegal possession of
drugs. Was the shabu admissible in evidence?

A.

No, since it was the fruit of an unlawful arrest. A
warrantless arrest under S5(b) R113 requires that
the arresting officers have "probable cause to
believe based on personal knowledge of facts or
circumstances that the person to be arrested has
436

J9JC9B0M

Rule 113
Arrest

committed it." A hearsay tip by itself does not justify
a warrantless arrest. Law enforcers must have
personal knowledge of facts, based on their
observation, that the person sought to be arrested
has just committed a crime. In this case, records
failed to show that the policemen had any personal
knowledge that a crime had been committed by
accused, as in fact, he even admitted that he merely
relied on the two teenagers' tip. That the accused
was reeking of alcohol is not a fact or circumstance
indicating that the accused had committed a crime.
Surely, to interpret "personal knowledge" as to
encompass unverified tips from strangers would
create a dangerous precedent and unnecessarily
stretch the authority and power of police officers to
effect warrantless arrests, rendering nugatory the
rigorous requisites under S5(b ) R113. (Reyes v.
People, 6 June 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

The accused was arrested by members of the
Bantay Bayan while peeing in frontof his workplace. He was searched and marijuanarecovered
from him. He argues that the marijuana was
inadmissible in evidence since his arrest was
illegal. Is he right?

A.

Yes. The acts of the Bantay Bayan - or any barangaybased or other volunteer organizations in the nature
of watch groups - relating to the preservation of peace
and order in their respective areas have the color of a
state-related function. As such, they should be
deemed as law enforcement authorities for the
purpose of applying the Bill of Rights under Article Ill
of the 1987 Constitution to them.

437

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The arrest here was plainly illegal since the
accused was not committing any offense when he
was arrested. Hence the marijuana being the fruit of
an illegal arrest is inadmissible in evidence. (Miguel
v. People, 31 July 2017, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

In March 2003, Petitioner while driving his
motorcycle near the Naga City Police Station was
flagged down by a police officerfor not wearing a
helmet in violationof a City Ordinance. While the
police officerwas preparing the citation ticket, he
noticed the Petitioner was uneasy and kept
getting something from his pocket. The police
officer searched the Petitioner and discovered
that he was in possession of shabu. May the
shabu seized from the Petitioner be used in
evidence against him?

A.

No. The search was not incidental to a valid arrest.
Under City Ordinance No. 98-012, which was
violated by petitioner, the failure to wear a crash
helmet while riding a motorcycle is penalized by a
fine only. Under the Rules of Court, a warrant of
arrest need not be issued if the information or
charge was filed for an offense penalized by a fine
only. As a corollary, neither can a warrantless
arrest be made for such an offense. There being no
valid arrest, the seizure of the shabu without a
search warrant was invalid and hence the same
may not be used in evidence against the Petitioner.
(Luz v. People, 29 February 2012, Sereno, J.).70

70Even
under R.A. No. 10054 (Motorcyle Helmet Act of 2009), the penalty
for not wearing a helmet is fine only and confiscation of the driver's license for
the fourth and succeeding offenses.

438

J9JC9B0M

Rule 113
Arrest

Q.

What is the method of arrest by a peace officer
by virtue of a warrant?

A.

When making an arrest by virtue of a warrant, the
officer shall inform the person to be arrested of the
cause of the arrest and the fact that a warrant has
been issued for his arrest, except when he flees or
forcibly resists before the officer has opportunity to
so inform him, or when the giving of such
information will imperil the arrest. (S? R113).

Q.

Must the officer have the warrant in
possessionat the time of the arrest?

A.

No. The officer need not have the warrant in his
possession at the time of the arrest but after the
arrest, if the person arrested so requires, the warrant
shall be shown to him as soon as practicable (asap).
(S? R113).

Q.

What is the method of arrest by an officer
without a warrant?

A.

When making an arrest without a warrant, the
officer shall inform the person to be arrested of his
authority and the cause of the arrest, unless the
latter is either engaged in the commission of an
offense, is pursued immediately after its commission,
has escaped, flees, or forcibly resists before the
officer has opportunity to so inform him, or when
the giving of such information will imperil the arrest.
(SB R113).

Q.

What is the method of arrest by a private person?

A.

When making an arrest, a private person shall
inform the person to be arrested of the intention to
arrest him and the cause of the arrest, unless the
latter is either engaged in the commission of an

439

his

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

offense,
is
pursued
immediately
after its
cornrrussron, or has escaped, flees, or forcibly
resists before the person making the arrest has
opportunity to so inform him, or when the giving of
such information will imperil the arrest. (S9 R113).
Q.

Distinguishthe determination of probable cause
by the prosecutor from the determination of
probable cause by the judge.

A.

The determination of probable cause by the
prosecutor is to determine whether or not there is a
sufficient ground to hold the respondent for trial while
the determination of probable cause by the judge is
for the purpose of issuing a warrant of arrest. (People
v. Gaba, G.R. No. 161083, 3 August 2010).

440

J9JC9B0M

RULE 114. BAIL
Q.

Define bail.

A.

Bail is the security given for the release of a person
in custody of the law, furnished by him or a
bondsman, to guarantee his appearance before
any court. (S1 R114).

Q.

Give the constitutionalbasis of the right to bail.

A.

All persons, except those charged With offenses
punishable by reclusion perpetua when evidence of
guilt is strong, shall, before conviction, be bailable
by sufficient sureties, or be released on
recognizance as may be provided by law. The right
to bail shall not be impaired even when the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus is suspended.
Excessive bail shall not be required. (Sec. 13, Art.
Ill, Constitution).

Q.

May witnesses be required to post bail?

A.

Yes under the circumstance set forth in S 14 R 110
and S14 R119.

Q.

What are the kinds of bail?

A.

The kinds of bail are the following: (SPCR)
(1)

CORPORATE SURETY BOND. A bond
furnished by a corporate surety under which the
latter guarantees the State that the accused will
appear at subsequent proceedings.

(2)

PROPERTY BOND. An undertaking constituted
as a lien on the real property given as security
for the amount of the bail.
441

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(3)

CASH DEPOSIT. An amount deposited with
the proper government officer considered as
bail upon condition that such money will be
forfeited if the accused does not appear before
the court requiring his attendance.

(4)

RECOGNIZANCE. It is an undertaking that the
accused shall appear in court and comply with
its orders. The court may allow the person in
custody to be released on his own recognizance
or that of a responsible person. (S15 R114).

Q.

When is bail a matter of right?

A.

Bail is a matter of right before or after conviction by
the MTC and before conviction by the RTC of an
offense not punishable by death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment. (S4 R114).

Q.

When is admission to bail discretionary?

A.

Admission to bail is discretionary in the following
instances:
(1)

Before conviction by the RTC of an offense
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment.

(2)

After conviction by the RTC of an offense not
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment.

Q.

May a court require that the accused be
arraigned first before his application for bail
may be granted?

A.

No. The Supreme Court has held that in cases
where it is authorized, bail should be granted
before arraignment, otherwise the accused may be

442

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

hindered from filing a motion to quash since his
arraignment would necessarily be deferred pending
the resolution of the motion to quash. This would
amount to a substantial dilution of his right to file a
motion to quash. (Lavides v. Court of Appeals, 1
February 2000).71
Q.

In an Information charging them of Murder,
policemen A, B, and C were convicted of
Homicide. A appealed from the decision but B
and C did not. B started serving his sentence but
C escaped and is at large. In the Court of
Appeals, A applied for bail but was denied.
Finally the Court of Appeals rendered a decision
acquitting A on the ground that the evidence
pointed to the NPA as the killers of the victim.
1) Was the Court of Appeal's denial of A's
application for bail proper?
2) xxx (98 Bar Q13)

A.
1) Yes the Court of Appeals had the discretion to
deny A's bail application. Bail is discretionary
after conviction by the RTC of an offense even if
not punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or
life imprisonment.
Q.

When should bail be denied?

A.

Bail should be denied in the following instances:
( 1 ) After conviction by the RTC of an offense and
the penalty imposed is death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment.

"ouesttons based on this holding were asked in the 2015 and 2019
Remedial Law Bar Examinations.

443

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(2)

After conviction by the RTC and the penalty
imposed is imprisonment exceeding 6 years
upon a showing by the prosecution of
the following or other similar circumstances:
(REP FC)

a) RECIDIVIST. The accused is a recidivist,
quasi-recidivist, or habitual delinquent, or has
committed the crime aggravated by the
circumstance of reiteration.
b) ESCAPED. The accused has previously
escaped from legal confinement, evaded
sentence, or violated the conditions of his bail
without valid justification. (eve)
c) PROBATION. The accused committed the
offense while under probation, parole, or
conditional pardon. (ppc)
d) FLIGHT RISK. The circumstances of his case
indicate the probability of flight if released
on bail.
e) CRIME RISK. There is undue risk that the
accused may commit another crime during
the pendency of the appeal. (S5 R114).
(Note: The above circumstances are also
known as "bail-negating circumstances." [Leviste v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. 189122, 17 March 201 OJ).
(3)

Where the judgment of conviction has become
final, unless before finality the accused applies
for probation. (S24 R114).

444

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

Q.

Rufina Chua met Wilfred Chiok who
misrepresented himself to be a licensed stock
broker and duped Chua into investing funds with
him which he later spent. After trial, Chiok was
convicted of estafa and sentencedto 12 years of
prision mayor, as minimum, to 20 years of
reclusion temporal, as maximum. The RTC
cancelledChiok's bail on the ground that he was
a flight risk. Chiok appealed to the Court of
Appeals. SubsequentlyChiok filed with the CA a
special civil action for certiorari with application
for preliminary injunction assailing the RTC's
order cancelling his bail. The CA in the certiorari
case issued an order enjoining the RTC from
arresting Chiok holding that he should not be
deprived of his liberty pending his appeal.Was it
proper for the CA to issue the order?

A.

No. Under the last paragraph of S5 R114, the
appropriate remedy to review the trial court's
resolution denying or cancelling bail is a motion to
review with the appellate court. Chiok should have
filed such a motion in the appealed case with the
CA which he himself initiated. Such a motion is an
incident in his appeal. The filing of a separate
petition via a special civil action questioning such
adverse order before the appellate court is
proscribed. (Chua v. Court of Appeals, 12 April
2007, Sandoval-Gutierrez,J.).

Q.

John Doe was charged with murder before the
RTC. His bail application was granted upon a
showing that the evidence of guilt was not
strong. However, he was convicted after trial of
murder and sentenced to reclusion perpetua.
May John Doe be allowed to remain free on his
445

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

original bail or to apply for bail pending the
resolution of his appeal?
A.

No, John Doe may neither be allowed to remain
free on his original bail or to apply for bail pending
appeal. Under S? R114 no person charged with a
capital offense, or an offense punishable by
reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, shall be
admitted to bail when evidence of guilt is strong,
regardless of the stage of the criminal prosecution.
John Doe's bail should be cancelled or he
should no longer be admitted to bail since his
conviction clearly imports that the evidence of his
guilt is strong. (People v. Cortez, G.R. No. 92560,
15 October 1991 ).

Q.

Section 13, Article Ill of the Constitution and 57
R114 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure
provide as follows:
SEC. 13. All persons, except those charged
with offenses punishable by reclusion perpetua
when evidence of guilt is strong, shall, before
conviction, be bailable by sufficient securities, or
be released on recognizance as may be
provided by law. xxx
SEC. 7. Capital offense or an offense
punishable by reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment, not bailable. - No person
charged with a capital offense, or an offense
punishable by reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment, shall be admitted to bail when
evidence of guilt is strong, regardless of the stage
of the criminal prosecution.(7a)

446

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
.Bail

In determining whether an offense is punishable
by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, what is the
penalty to be considered?

A.

The penalty to be considered is the prescribed
penalty, not the imposable penalty. (People v. Valdez,
8 December 2015, e.b., Peralta, J.). Prescribed
penalty is the time range of imprisonment mentioned
in the Revised Penal Code or in the special law
punishing the offense. Imposable penalty is that
imposed by the court after taking into account
aggravating or modifying circumstances which would
increase the penalty to reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment. The imposable penalty may be meted
only after the presence of attending or modifying
circumstances have been proved by evidence or by
the accused's admission or confession. (Id.).

Q.

An accused was charged with the crime of
malversation of public funds involving the
amount of P274,000. Under Article217(4) of the
Revised Penal Code, the penaltyfor malversation
of public funds or property if the amount
involved exceeds P22,000.00 shall be reclusion
temporal in its maximum period to reclusion
perpetua. Is the accused entitled to bail as a
matter or right?

A.

Yes. The term "punishable" in S7 R114 refers to the
prescribed penalty, not to the imposable penalty.
Prescribed penalty refers to the time range provided
for in the statute punishing an offense while
imposable penalty is that meted after trial upon
establishing the presence of aggravating or
modifying circumstances. Under the penalty stated
in Article 217(4 ), reclusion perpetua, the maximum
period, can be imposed only if it is proved that the
447

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

cornrmssion of the crime was attended by an
aggravating circumstance. (Article 64[3]). Hence
reclusion perpetua is the imposable penalty not the
prescribed penalty. (See People v. Valdez, 8
December 2015, e.b., Peralta, J.). Otherwise put,
since the prescribed penalty starts with reclusion
temporal, bail is still a matter of right even if the high
end of the prescribed penalty is reclusion perpetua.
Q.

An accused former mayor was charged with the
complex crime of malversation of public funds
through falsification of official/public documents.
The amount alleged to have been malversed
was P274,000.UnderArticle 217(4)of the Revised
Penal Code, the penalty for malversation of
public funds or property if the amount involved
exceeds P22,000.00shall be reclusion temporal
in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua.
The penalty for falsification by a public officer is
prision mayor. Article 48 concerning the penalty
for complex crimes provides that the penalty for
the most serious crime shall be imposed in its
maximum period. The prosecution contends
that the accused is not entitled to bail as a
matter of right since the penalty for the more
serious crime in its maximum period is
reclusion perpetua. Is the accused entitled to
bail as a matter or right?

A.

Yes. The term "punishable" in S? R114 refers to
the prescribed penalty, not to the imposable
penalty. An imposable penalty is one which is
meted only after establishing that attending or
modifying circumstances were present in the
commission of the crime. Here the penalty of
reclusion perpetua may be imposed only after it is
established after trial that a complex crime was

448

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail
indeed committed. Since the prescribed penalty for
the more serious crime of malversation starts with
reclusion temporal, bail is a matter of right even if
the high end of the prescribed penalty is reclusion
perpetua. (People v, Valdez, 8 December 2015,
e.b., Peralta, J.).
Q.

The accused was convicted by the RTC of
homicide and sentenced to an indeterminate
penalty of 6 years and 1 day of prision mayor as
minimum to 12 years and 1 day of reclusion
temporal as maximum. Pending appeal of his
conviction to the CA, the accused applied to the
CA for bail citing the grounds of advanced age
and ill health and the absence of any of the bailnegating circumstances under 55 R114. The
accused contends that, in the absence of any of
the bail-negating circumstances, he is entitled
to bail as a matter of right. Is the accused's
contention correct?

A.

No. Upon conviction of the accused by the RTC
imposing a penalty greater than 6 years but which is
not death, reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment,
admission to bail is discretionaryif none of the bailnegating circumstances mentioned in Section 5 (flight
risk, crime risk, recidivist, habitual delinquency,
previous escape, etc.) are present. Admission to bail
is not a matter of right as argued by Petitioner. The
court may deny bail on considerations other than the
absence of the circumstances under S5 R114 as in
the court's prima facie determination that there is no
substantial ground for the reversal of the conviction.
On the other hand, if any of the circumstances are
present, the court has no option but to deny or revoke
bail. (Leviste v. Court of Appeals, G.R. 189122, 17
March 2010).
449

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Give the rule on bail when the accused is
charged with an offense punishable by death,
reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment.

A.

Such an accused shall not be admitted to bail when
the evidence of guilt is strong. (S? R114).

Q.

What is the meaning of the phrase "when the
evidence of guilt is strong" in 57 R114?

A.

It means that there is evident proof or a great
presumption of the accused's guilt. Even if there is a
reasonable doubt as to the accused's guilt but if on an
examination of the entire record the presumption is
great that the accused is guilty of the offense, then
bail should not be granted. The test is not whether the
evidence establishes guilt beyond reasonable doubt
but rather whether it shows evident guilt or a great
presumption of guilt. (People v. Cabral, G.R. 131909,
18 February 1999).

Q.

For purposes of bail, when is the strength of the
evidence of guilt determined?

A.

It is determined at the hearing of an application for
bail filed by a person who is in custody for the
commission of an offense punishable by death,
reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment.

Q.

Who has the burden of proof in showing that
evidence of guilt is strong?

A.

The prosecution.

Q.

In a murder case, the prosecution did not raise
any objection to the accused's application for
bail. May the judge grant bail without a hearing?

(SB R114).

450

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail
A.

No. That the prosecutor interposed no objection to
the bail application does not relieve the judge of the
duty to set the motion for bail for hearing.
(Managuelod v. Paclibon, 426 SCRA 377).

Outline the procedure in the bail hearing in
offenses punishable by death, reclusion perpetua,
or life imprisonment.

Q.

A.
a) The hearing of the accused's motion for bail in
offenses
punishable
by death, reclusion
perpetua or life imprisonment shall be summary,
with the prosecution bearing the burden of
showing that the evidence of guilt is strong. The
accused may at his option, if he wants the court
to consider his evidence as well, submit in
support of his motion the affidavits of his
witnesses attesting to his innocence.
b) At the hearing of the accused's motion for bail, the
prosecution shall present its witnesses with the
option of examining them on direct or adopting the
affidavits they executed during the preliminary
investigation as their direct testimonies.
c) The court shall examine the witnesses on their
direct testimonies or affidavits to ascertain if the
evidence of guilt of the accused is strong. The
court's questions need not follow any particular
order and may shift from one witness to
another. The court shall then allow counsels
from both sides to examine the witnesses as
well. The court shall afterwards hear the oral
arguments of the parties on whether or not the
evidence of guilt is strong.

451

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

d) Within 48 hours after hearing, the court shall
issue an order containing a brief summary of
the evidence adduced before it, followed by its
conclusion of whether or not the evidence of
guilt is strong. Such conclusion shall not be
regarded as a pre-judgment on the merits of the
case that is to be determined only after a fullblown trial. Sec. 6, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC,
effective 1 May 2014).
The resolution of petition for bail shall be
based solely on the evidence presented during
the bail proceedings by the prosecution. The
prosecution shall present only pieces of evidence
that are essential in establishing that the evidence
of guilt is strong. The accused need not present
evidence to contradict or rebut the prosecution's
evidence. (Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial
of Criminal Cases).72
Q.

During the trial, may the court consider the
evidence presentedduring the bail hearing?

A. Yes. The evidence presented during the bail
hearing shall be considered automatically
reproduced at the. trial. But upon motion of either
party, the court may recall any witness for
additional examination unless the witness is unable
to testify. (88 R114).
Q.

Facing a charge of murder, X filed a petition for
bail. The petitionwas opposedby the prosecution
but after hearing, the court granted bail to X.
On the first scheduled hearing on the merits,
the prosecution manifested that it was not

72The
accused however, if he wants to, should be given the chance to
present contradicting or rebutting evidence.

452

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

adducing additional evidence and that it was
resting its case. X filed a demurrer to evidence
without leave of court but it was denied by
the court.
1) Did the court have the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence under the circumstances
mentioned above?
2) If the answer to the preceding question is in the
affirmative,can X adduce evidence in his defense
after the denial of his demurrerto evidence?
3) Without further proceeding and on the sole basis
of the evidence of the prosecution,can the court
legally convict X for murder? (98 Bar 014).
A.

1) Yes the court had the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence.
It is axiomatic that an interlocutory order is not
final and conclusive and may be modified or set
aside by a trial court while it has jurisdiction over
the case.
Here the order of the court denying bail and
finding that the evidence of X's guilt is not strong is
an interlocutory order which may be set aside or
modified by the trial court. Hence the trial court had
the discretion to deny the demurrer even though
it had earlier ruled that the evidence of guilt was not
strong.
2) No X can no longer adduce evidence in his
defense after the denial of his demurrer to
evidence. If the demurrer to evidence was filed
without leave of court and the demurrer is
453

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

denied, the accused waives the right to present
evidence and submits the case for judgment on
the basis of the prosecution evidence.
3) Yes the court can legally convict X for murder.
Under SS R114, the evidence presented during
the bail hearing shall be considered automatically
reproduced during the trial. If the court finds that
the evidence is sufficient to prove X's guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, then it may legally
convict X for murder.
Q.

What are the guidelines for the judge in fixing
the amount of bail?

A.

The judge who issued the warrant or granted the
application shall fix a reasonable amount of bail
considering primarily, but not limited to, the
following factors: (FNPC HAW PPFF)
a) Financial ability of the accused.
b) Nature and circumstances of the offense.
c) Penalty for the offense charged.
d) Character and reputation of the accused.
e) Age and health of the accused.
f) Weight of the evidence against the accused.
g) Probability of the accused appearing at the trial.
h) Forfeiture of other bail.
i) The fact that the accused was a fugitive from
justice when arrested.
j) Pendency of other cases where the accused is
on bail.
454

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

Excessive bail shall not be required. (89 R114)
Q.

May the Department of Justice's Bail Bond Guide
be considered in fixing the amount of bail?

A. Yes, but it shall not be controlling upon the court.
(Sec. 1, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective 1 May 2014).
Q.

Is the order of the court fixing the amount of
bail appealable?

A.

No. (Sec. 4, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective 1
May 2014). The reason is that such an order is
interlocutory.

Q.

When is bail not required? (LO 62 SMS)

A. Bail shall not be required in the following instances:
1) Violation of an ordinance, a light felony, or a
criminal offense punishable by a penalty not
exceeding 6 months' imprisonment, and/or a
fine of P2,000 where the person is unable to
post the required cash or bail bond. (81 RA
No. 6306).
2) Criminal cases covered by the Rule on
Summary Procedure except when the accused
failed to appear when required. (816 Rule on
Summary Procedure).
3) When a person has been in custody for a period
equal to or more than the possible maximum
imprisonmentprescribedfor the offense charged,
he shall be released immediately, without
prejudice to the continuation of the trial or the
proceedings on appeal. If the maximum penalty
to which the accused may be sentenced is
455

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

destierro, he shall be released after 30 days of
preventive imprisonment. (S16 R114).
4) In cases not requiring preliminary investigation nor
covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure
where the MTC judge is satisfied that there is no
necessity for placing the accused under custody,
in which case he may issue summons instead of
a warrant of arrest. (S8[b] R 112).
Q.

When may a person be released on a reduced
bail or on his own recognizance?

A.

A person in custody for a period equal to or more
than the minimum of the principal penalty
prescribed for the offense charged, without
application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law or
any modifying circumstance, shall be released on a
reduced bail or on his own recognizance, at the
discretion of the court. (816 R114).

Q.

When may a person be released on recognizance?
(LO 62 SPCM)

A.
1) When the offense charged is for violation of an
ordinance, a light felony, or a criminal offense,
the imposable penalty for which does not
exceed 6 months imprisonment and/or P2,000
fine. (R.A. No. 6306)
2) When a person has been in custody for a period
equal to or more than the minimum of the principal
penalty prescribed for the offense charged, without
application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law or
any modifying circumstance, he shall be released
on a reduced bail or on his own recognizance, at
the discretion of the court. (816 R114).
456

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

3) When the accused has applied for probation,
pending resolution of the case but no bail was
filed or the accused is incapable of filing one.
(S24 R114).
4) Where a child is detained, the court shall order
the release of the minor on recognizance to
his/her parents and other suitable persons.
(S35 RA No. 9344)
5) In cases covered by the Rule on Summary
Procedure where the accused has been
arrested for failure to appear when required. He
may be released on recognizance by a
responsible citizen acceptable to the court.
(S16 Rule on Summary Procedure).
Q.

Once the accused is admitted to bail, may the
court increase or reduce its amount?

A.

Yes upon good cause. When increased, the
accused may be committed to custody if he does
not give bail in the increased amount within a
reasonable period.
An accused held to answer a criminal charge,
who is released without bail upon filing of the
complaint or information, may, at any subsequent
stage of the proceedings and whenever a strong
showing of guilt appears to the court, be required to
give bail in the amount fixed, or in lieu thereof,
committed to custody. (S20 R114).

Q.

Where is bail filed? (GARDiN)

A.
1) GENERALLY. Bail in the amount fixed may be
filed with the court where the case is pending,
457

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

or in the absence or unavailability of the judge
thereof, with any RTC or MTC judge in the
province, city, or municipality.

2) ARRESTED OTHER THAN WHERE CASE
PENDING. If the accused is arrested in a
province, city, or municipality other than where
the case is pending, bail may also be filed with
any RTC of said place, or if no RTC judge is
available, with any MTG judge therein.
3) RECOGNIZANCE/DISCRETIONARY.
Where the
grant of bail is discretionary or the accused
seeks to be released on recognizance, the
application may be filed only in the court where
the case is pending, on trial or on appeal.
4) NOT YET CHARGED. Any person in custody
who is not yet charged in court may apply for
bail with any court in the province, city, or
municipalitywhere he is held. (817 R114).
Q.

When may the bail of the accused be ordered
forfeited?

A.

When the presence of the accused is required by
the court or these Rules, his bondsmen shall be
notified to produce him before the court on a given
date and time. If the accused fails to appear in
person as required, his bail shall be declared or
ordered forfeited (821 R114).

Q.

May the order of forfeiture be appealed?

A.

No since it is merely interlocutoryand provisional.

458

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

Q.

When may the court render a judgment of
forfeiture?

A.

In the order of forfeiture of the bail, the bondsmen
shall be given 30 days within which to produce their
principal and to show cause why no judgment
should be rendered against them for the amount of
their bail (PS). Within the said period, the
bondsmen must: (PE)
(a)

produce the body of their principal or give the
reason for his non-production; and

(b)

explain why the accused did not appear before
the court when first required to do so.

Failing in these two requisites, a judgment
shall be rendered against the bondsmen, jointly and
severally, for the amount of the bail. The court shall
not reduce or otherwise mitigate the liability of the
bondsmen,
unless the accused
has been
surrendered or is acquitted. (S21 R114).
Q.

Is the judgment of forfeiture appealable?

A.

Yes since it is a final order with respect to the
bondsmen. Appeal must be perfected within 15
days from notice by the bondsmen of the judgment
of forfeiture pursuant to S6 R 122 (Reliance Surety
& Insurance Co. v. Amante, 30 June 2005).

Q.

When may the bail be cancelled?

A.

Upon application of the bondsmen, with due notice
to the prosecutor, the bail may be cancelled upon
surrender of the accused or proof of his death (SD).

459

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The bail shall be be deemed automatically
cancelled upon acquittal of the accused, dismissal
of the case, or execution of the judgment of
conviction (ADE). (822 R114).
Q.

Is the cancellation of the bail without prejudice
to any liability thereon?

A.

Yes. (822 R114).

Q.

Will an application for bail or admission thereto
bar objections to illegal arrest or to lack of or
irregularity of the preliminary investigation?

A.

No. An application for or admission to bail shall not
bar the accused from challenging the validity of his
arrest or the legality of the warrant issued therefor,
or from assailing the regularity or questioning the
absence of a preliminary investigationof the charge
against him (PAW), provided that the raises them
before entering his plea. (826 R114).

Q.

After Alma had started serving her sentencefor
violation of Batas PambansaBig. 22, she filed a
petition of writ of habeascorpus, citing Vaca v.
Court of Appeals where the sentence of
imprisonmentof a party found guilty of violation
of BP 22 was reduced to a fine equal to double
the amount of the check involved. She prayed
that her sentence be similarly modified and that
she be immediatelyreleasedfrom detention. In
the alternative, she prayed that pending
determination on whether the Vaca ruling
applies to her, she be allowed to post bail
pursuant to Rule 102, Sec. 14, which provides
that if a person is lawfully imprisoned or
restrained on a charge of having committed an
offense not punishable by death, he may be
460

J9JC9B0M

Rule 114
Bail

admitted to bail in the discretion of the court.
Accordingly, the trial court allowed Alma to post
bail and then ordered her release. In your
opinion, is the order of the trial court correct?
(a)

xxx

(b) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure?
(08 Bar Q19).
A.

(a) xxx
(b) In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under the Rules of Criminal Procedure.
S24 R114 provides that no bail shall be
allowed after a judgment of conviction has become
final and that in no case shall bail be allowed after
the accused has commenced to serve sentence.
Here Alma had already commenced to serve
sentence. Hence bail cannot be allowed.

Q.

When may a hold-departure order (HDO) be
issued?

A.

A HOO shall be issued only in criminal cases within
the exclusive jurisdiction of the RTC. (SC Cir 39-97
[19 June 1997]).

Q.

DOJ Circular No. 41 provided that the Secretaryof
Justice may issue a Hold-DepartureOrder (HDO),
a Watchlist Order (WLO), and a Allow Departure
Order. A person against whom an HDO or WLO
has been issued cannot leave the country unless
an ADO was issued by the Secretary of Justice.
Does the Secretary of Justice have the authority
to issue HDOs,WLOs, and ADOs?

461

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. The Constitution provides that the right to travel
can be restricted in the interest of national security,
public safety, and public health as provided by law.
DOJ Circular 41 is not a law. Hence such circular
is unconstitutional for being violative of the right to
travel. (Genuino v. De Lima, 17 April 2018,
e.b., Reyes, J.).

Q.

Does the Sandiganbayan have the power to
issue HDOs even if it was not mentioned in SC
Circular 39-97?

A.

Yes. The power to issue HDOs is an inherent power
of the courts. SC Circular No. 39-97 should not be
interpreted to mean that only RTCs can issue
HDOs. What the circular intended was to exclude
the issuance of HDOs in criminal cases cognizable
by the MTC. (Garcia v. Sandiganbayan, 17 October
2018, Reyes, J.).

462

J9JC9B0M

RULE 115. RIGHTS OF ACCUSED
Q.

What are the rights of the accused at the trial?

A.

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be
entitled to the following rights:
(a)

To be presumed innocent until the contrary is
proved beyond reasonable doubt.

(b)

To be informed of the nature and cause of the
accusation against him.

(c)

To be present and defend in person and by
counsel at every stage of the proceedings,
from arraignment to promulgation of the
judgment. The accused may, however, waive
his presence at the trial pursuant to the
stipulations set forth in his bail, unless his
presence is specifically ordered by the court
for purposes of identification. The absence of
the accused without justifiable cause at the
trial of which he had notice shall be considered
a waiver of his right to be present thereat.
When an accused under custody escapes, he
shall be deemed to have waived his right to be
present on all subsequent trial dates until
custody over him is regained. Upon motion,
the accused may be allowed to defend himself
in person when it sufficiently appears to the
court that he can properly protect his rights
without the assistance of counsel.

(d)

To testify as a witness in his own behalf but
subject to cross-examination on matters covered
by direct examination. His silence shall not in
any manner prejudice him.
463

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(e)

To be exempt from being compelled to be a
witness against himself.

(f)

To confront and cross-examine the witnesses
against him at the trial.

Either party may utilize as part of its evidence
the testimony of a witness who is deceased, out of
or cannot with due diligence be found in the
Philippines, unavailable, or otherwise unable to
testify (DOFU), given in another case or proceeding,
judicial or administrative, involving the same parties
and subject matter, the adverse party having the
opportunity to cross-examine him. (PSC)
(g)

To have compulsory process issued to secure
the attendance of witnesses and production of
other evidence in his behalf.

(h) To have speedy, impartial and public trial.
(i)

To appeal in all cases allowed and in the
manner prescribed by law.

Q,

May an accused chargedwith the crime of other
forms of swindling under Article 316,paragraph
1 of the Revised Penal Code, which punishes
"[a]ny person who, pretending to be the owner
of any real property, shall convey, sell,
encumber,or mortgagethe same" be convicted
of other forms of swindling under Article 316,
paragraph 2, which punishes the act of any
person who, knowing that real property is
encumbered, shall dispose of the same,
although such encumbranceis not recorded"?

A.

No. To uphold the petitioner's conviction for an
offense other than that charged in the Information
would be a violation of her right to be informed of the

464

J9JC9B0M

Rule 115
Rights Of Accused

nature and cause of the accusation against her.
(Estrellado-Mainarv. People, 29 July 2015, Brion, J.).
Q.

A criminal case for estafa was brought against
Atty. Abogado for misappropriating P1 ,500,000
which he had collected for a corporate client in
a case handled by him. On direct examination,
Atty. Abogado's testimony was solely to the
effect that he did not receivethe P1 ,500,000.On
cross-examination,Atty. Abogado was shown a
receipt for a P1 ,500,000collection in behalf of
his client and asked if the signature in the
receipt was his. Atty. Abogado objected to the
question on the ground that the answer would
tend to incriminate him.
a) Should the objection of Atty. Abogado be
sustained?
Atty. Abogadowas also asked if he had been
convictedby final judgment of qualifiedtheft.
b) May Atty. Abogado object to this question
and if so on what ground?

A.
a) No, the objection of Atty. Abogado should not be
sustained.
The Supreme Court has held that an accused
who takes the witness stand waives the privilege
against self-incrimination.
Here Atty. Abogado had taken the witness
stand and claimed that he had not received the
P1 ,500,000. Hence he can be cross-examined on
the matter to show that he had indeed received the
P1 ,500,000.

465

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) Yes, Atty. Abogado may object to the question
on the ground that it was not covered by his
direct examination.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
accused who testifies is subject to cross-examination
on matters covered by the direct examination.
(S1 [d] R115)
Here the question was on a matter not covered
by the direct examination which dealt only with a
simple denial. Hence Atty. Abogado may object to
the question.

Q. Raulo, accused of falsification of a public
document, testified in his own behalf. On crossexamination, he was asked to take dictation in
his own writingfor the purpose of comparison.
He refused. May he be compelled to take the
dictation? Explain. (88 Bar Q18b)
A.

The answer depends on whether or not Raulo had
in his direct testimony denied falsifying the public
document.
If Raulo had denied falsifying the public
document, then he may be compelled to take the
dictation. An accused who takes the witness stand
is subject to cross-examination on matters covered
by the direct examination (S1[d] R115) and to such
extent is deemed to have waived the privilege
against self-incrimination.
On the other hand, if Raulo had not denied
falsifying the public document (as when he testifies
merely on his character), then he cannot be
compelled to take the dictation. Compelling him to
do so would violate his right against self-incrimination

466

J9JC9B0M

Rule 115
Rights Of Accused

since writing is not a purely mechanical act but
requires the application of intelligenceand attention.
(Beltran v. Samson, 50 Phil. 570).
Q.

Accused police officer was arrested for
extortion after an entrapment operation. He was
compelled to undergo a drug test by submitting
his urine sample. The urine sample tested
positive for drugs. Accused was convicted of
the crime of use of dangerous drugs under
Section 15, Art. II of the Comprehensive
Dangerous Drugs Act (R.A. 9165). He challenged
the admissibilty of the urine sample on the
ground that his drug testing violated his right
against self-incrimination.Was the urine sample
properly admitted in evidence?

A.

No. The drug testing violated the accused's right
against self-incrimination.The drug test in Section 15
of RA 9165 covers only those arrested for crimes
under Art. II of RA 9165. Here the accused was
arrestedfor extortionnot for dangerousdrug use.
The rule is that the right against selfincrimination is a prohibition against testimonial
compulsion.Cases where non-testimonialcompulsion
has been allowed reveal, however, that the pieces
of evidence obtained were all material to the
principal cause of the arrest.

In the instant case, a urine sample is
immaterial to the charge of extortion. It is thus
erroneous to hold that the extraction of petitioner's
urine for purposes of drug testing was "merely a
mechanical act, hence, falling outside the concept
of a custodial investigation." (Dela Cruz v. People,
730 SCRA 655 [2014]).
467

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the rights of a person under custodial
investigation?

A.

A person under investigation for the commission of
an offense (custodial investigation) shall have the
following rights: (SC VS)
(1) Right to remain silent and right to be informed
of such right.
(2) Right to have competent and independent
counsel preferably of his own choice and to be
informed of such right. If the person cannot
afford the services of counsel, he must be
provided with one. The right to remain silent
and to counsel cannot be waived except in
writing and in the presence of counsel.
(3)

The right against torture, force, violence,
threat, intimidation, or any other means which
vitiate the free will.

(4)

The right against secret detention places, solitary,
incommunicado, or other similar forms of
detention (ssio). (Sec. 12, Art. Ill, Constitution).

Q.

What is the consequence if the confession or
admission was obtained in violation of the
foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation?

A.

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of
the foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation shall be inadmissible in evidence
against him. (Sec. 12[3], Art. Ill, Constitution).

Q.

Arrested after a buy-bust operation, the accused
was made to sign a "receipt for property seized"
which included the shabu seized from him.
468

J9JC9B0M

Rule 115
Rights Of Accused

Accused contends that he was not assisted by a
lawyer when he signed the "Receipt for Property
Seized;" therefore, the document cannot be
admitted in evidence against him as his act of
signing the same is a form of confession or
admission. Is the accused's contention correct?
A.

Yes. There is no showing in the records of this case
that accused was assisted by a counsel when he
signed the "Receipt for Property Seized." It is
settled that the signature of an accused in the
receipt of property seized is inadmissible in
evidence if it was obtained without the assistance
of counsel. The signature of the accused on such a
receipt is a declaration against his interest and a
tacit admission of the crime charged; hence, the
constitutional safeguard must be observed. (People
v. Endaya, 23 July 2014).

Q.

During custodial investigation, Atty. F, the
mayor's legal consultant who was supposed to
assist the accused, arrived only at 1 p.m., .after
the accused had been subjected to questioning
in the police station beginning 6 a.m. Was the
accused afforded the right to counsel?

A.

No. The person under investigationmust be assisted
by counsel at all times during custodial investigation.
Moreover, a legal counsel to the town mayor (in
which town the accused was held in custody) cannot
be said to be an independentcounsel.The admission
made during the custodial investigationwas held by
the Supreme Court to be inadmissible. (People v.
Panis, 14 February2018, Del Castillo,J.).

469

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Accused housemaid made a confession to the
police officer interviewing her at her employer's
residence that she took her employer's jewelry.
Accused contends that the confession is
inadmissible as she was not accorded her Miranda
rights. Is the Accused's contention correct?

A.

No. The accused was not under custodial
investigation when she was being interviewed at
the employer's residence.
The confession was
elicited during the initial interview of the police after
the accused called to report the missing money and
personal effects. The investigation was still a
general inquiry of the crime and has not focused on
a particular suspect. Also, she admitted to the crime
while at the residence of her employer, thus, she
was not yet taken into custody or otherwise
deprived of her freedom. (People v. Cabanada, 19
July 2017. Peralta, J.).

470

J9JC9B0M

RULE 116. ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEA
Q.

What is the schedule of the arraignmentand the
pre-trial?

A.

Once the court has acquired jurisdiction over the
person of the accused, the arraignment and the
pre-trial shall be set within 10 calendar days from
date of the court's receipt of the case for a detained
accused, and within 30 calendary days from the
date the court acquires jurisdiction (either by arrest
or voluntary surrender) over a non-detained
accused. (Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial
of Criminal Cases). Under the revised guidelines,
the arraignment and the pre-trial are held on on the
same day.

Q.

To whom shall the notice of arraignment and
pre-trial be sent?

A.

The notice of arraignment and pre-trial shall be sent
to the accused,his/hercounsel,privatecomplainantor
complaining law enforcement agent, public
prosecutor, and witnesses whose names appear in
the information for purposes of plea-bargaining,
arraignment, and pre-trial. (Revised Guidelines for
Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

Q.

How is the arraignment made?

A. The arraignment shall be made in open court by the
judge or clerk by furnishing the accused with a copy
of the complaint or information, reading the same in
the language or dialect known to him, and asking
him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. The
accused must be arraigned before the court where
471

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the complaint or information was filed or assigned
for trial. (81 [a] R 116).
Q.

May the reading of the informationbe waived?

A.

Yes. In multiple cases, the court, upon personal
examination of the accused, may allow a waiver of
the reading of the information upon the full
understanding and express consent of the accused
and his counsel, which consent shall be expressly
stated in both the minutes/certificate of arraignment
and the order of arraignment.
The court shall
explain the waiver to the accused in the language
or dialect known to him and ensure the accused's
full understanding of the consequences of the
waiver before approving the same. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

Q.

How is the plea made?

A.

The accused must be present at the arraignment
and must personally enter his plea.
Both arraignment and plea shall be made of
record, but failure to do so shall not affect the
validity of the proceedings. (81 (b] R116).

Q.

When shall a plea of not guilty be entered for
the accused? (REC)

A.
(1)

When the accused refuses to plea or makes a
conditional plea. (81 [c] R116).

(2) When the accused pleads guilty but presents
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be
deemed withdrawn and a plea of not guilty
shall be entered for him. (81 (d] R116).
472

J9JC9B0M

Rule 116
Arraignment And Plea

Q.

After a plea of guilty, the accused was allowed to
present evidence of mitigating circumstances.
The accused instead testified that he acted in
self-defense. What should the court do?

A.

The court should enter a plea of not guilty for the
accused. When the accused pleads guilty but
presents exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be
deemed withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be
entered for him. (S1(d) R116).

Q.

Is the private offended party required to appear at
the arraignment? What is the consequence if the
offended party fails to appear despite due notice?

A.

The private offended party shall be required to
appear at the arraignment for purposes of plea
bargaining, determination of civil liability, and other
matters requiring his presence (PCO). In case of
his failure to appear despite due notice, the court
may allow the accused to enter a plea of guilty to a
lesser offense which is necessarily included in the
offense charged with the conformity of the trial
prosecutor alone. (S1[f] R116).
This provision has been modified by the
Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal
Cases which state that plea bargaining shall proceed
provided the private offended party in private crimes,
or the arresting officer in victimless crimes, is present
to give his consent with the conformity of the public
prosecutor to the plea bargaining.

Q.

What is plea bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the prosecutor
in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to court approval. It
473

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL ,LAW

usually involves the defendant's pleading guilty to a
lesser offense or to only one or some of the counts of
a multi-count indictment in return for a lighter
sentence than that for the graver charge. (Black's
Law Dictionary, 5th ed., 1979). In our jurisdiction
however, plea bargaining is restricted to pleading
guilty to a lesser-included offense.
Q.

Section 23 of the Comprehensive Dangerous
Drugs Act disallows plea bargaining in drugs
cases. Is this provision valid?

A.

No, the provision is unconstitutional. It infringes on the
Supreme Court's constitutional rule-making power.
Plea bargaining is a procedural matter. (Estipona v.
Lobrigo, 15August2017, e.b., Peralta, J.).

Q.

X was charged with two counts of raping his
daughter. Upon arraignment, X pleaded guilty
but bargained for a lesser penalty for each case.
Complainant's mother and the public prosecutor
agreed with the plea bargain. Hence the trial
court rendered judgment sentencing X to ten
years for each count of rape.
(a) Was there a proper plea bargaining?
(b) If not, what should the court have done?

A.
(a) No. X's plea is not the plea bargaining
contemplated and allowed by law and the rules
of procedure. The only instance where a plea
bargaining is allowed under the Rules is when
an accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense
necessarily included in the offense charged
pursuant to S2 R116. In such a case, the

474

J9JC9B0M

Rule 116
Arraignment And Plea

reduction of the penalty is only a consequence
of the plea of guilt to a lesser penalty.
It must be emphasized that X did not plead to
a lesser offense but pleaded guilty to the rape
charges and only bargained for a lesser penalty. In
short he did not plea bargain but made conditions
on the penalty to be imposed. This is erroneous
because by pleading guilty to the offense charged,
accused-appellant should be sentenced to the
penalty to which he pleaded. (Peo-R,le v. Magat,
3
G.R. No. 130026, 31 May 2000, e.b.)
(b) The court should have entered a plea of not
guilty for X.
When the accused refused to plead or makes
a conditional plea, a plea of not guilty shall be
entered for him. (S1[c] R116).
Here X made a conditionalplea by admitting his
guilt provided that a certain penalty will be meted
upon him. Hence the court should have entered a
plea of not guilty. (People v. Magat, supra).
Q.

X was charged with murder attended by treachery
and evident premeditation. During arraignment, X,
assisted by counsel, pleased guilty with the
qualification "hindi ko sinadya patayin." X's
counsel assured the court that he fully apprised X
of the information, the nature of the charge, and
the consequences of his plea. X even waived the
prosecution's presentation of evidence against

73The
holding that plea bargaining is limited solely to pleading guilty to a
lesser offense seems arguable. There is nothing in the Rules of Criminal
Procedure to that effect. The 1985 Rules adopted in a footnote the definition in
Black's Law Dictionary that plea bargaining is "[t]he process whereby the
accused and the prosecution in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to court approval."

475

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

him. The court convicted X of murder.
a) Was the plea of guilty entered valid? Explain.
b) May the prosecution dispense with the
presentation of evidence despite the waiver
of the accused? Explain. (96 Bar Q13-2)
A.
a) No the plea of guilty entered was not valid.
When the accused makes a conditional plea, a
plea of not guilty shall be entered for him.
Here the plea of guilty was clearly conditional
since the accused claimed that he did not intend to
kill. Hence a plea of not guilty should have been
entered for him.
Furthermore, when the accused pleads guilty
to a capital -offense, the court shall conduct as
searching inquiry into the voluntariness and full
comprehension of the consequences of his plea.
Evidently the court did not conduct such inquiry as
it merely relied upon X's counsel's assurance.
b) No, the prosecution may not dispense with
the presentation of evidence despite the waiver of
the accused.
Firstly, since there was no valid plea, the court
should have vacated X's plea and required him to
plead anew.
Second, murder is a capital offense since it is
punishable by death. The court shall require the
prosecution to prove his guilt and the precise degree
of culpability.74
74At
the time this question was asked, murder was a capital offense since
it was punishable with death. Subsequently the death penalty was abolished by

476

J9JC9B0M

Rule 116
Arraignment And Plea

Q.

When may the accused enter a plea of guilty to
a lesser offense?

A.

At arraignment, the accused, with the consent of the
offended party and the prosecutor, may be allowed
by the trial court to plead guilty to a lesser offense
which is necessarily included in the offense
charged. (82 R 116) Note that the consent of both
the offended party and the prosecutor plus court
approval is required.
After arraignment but before trial, the accused
may still be allowed to plead guilty to said lesser
offense after withdrawing his plea of not guilty. No
amendment of the complaint or information is
necessaryin either case. (82 R116). The consent of
the offendedparty and the prosecutoris required.
One of the matters that shall be considered
during the pre-trial conference is plea bargaining.
(81 [a] R118). The prosecutor's and the offended
party's consent is needed for any plea-bargaining
arrangement. (SC Guidelines on Pretrial and
Discovery effective 14 August 2004). In victimless
crimes (such as drugs cases) the consent should
be given by the arresting officer.75 (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

Q.

May the accused plead guilty to a lesser offense
which is not necessarily included in the
crime charged?

R.A. No. 9346, effective 30 June 2006. Hence murder is no longer a capital
offense.
751t
seems more appropriate that in victimless crimes, the consent should
be given by the complaining law enforcement agent, who may not necessarily be
the arresting officer. After all, the notice of arraignment and pretrial is sent to him
not to the arresting officer.

477

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Not anymore. Under the 1985 Rules the accused
may plead guilty to a lesser offense regardless of
whether or not it was necessarily included in the
crime charged. However Section 4 of Circular 3898 restored the requirement under the 1964 Rules
that the lesser offense should be necessarily
included in the offense charge.

Q.

May the accused plead guilty to a lesser offense
which is cognizable by a court of lesser
jurisdiction than the trial court?

A.

Yes.
The lack of jurisdiction is only apparent
because once a court acquires jurisdiction by virtue
of the allegations of the complaint or information it
retains the same until the final disposition of
the case. (JOSE Y. FERIA, 1985 RULES ON
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 33 [19851).

Q.

What is a capital offense?

A.

A capital offense is an offense which, under the law
existing at the time of its commission and of
the arraignment, may be punished with death.
(See 86 R114).

Q.

What should the court do when the accused
pleads guilty to a capital offense?

A.

The court shall conduct a searching inquiry into the
voluntariness and full comprehension (SVC) of the
consequences of his plea and shall require the
prosecution to prove his guilt and the precise
degree of culpability (PGD). (83 R116).

Q.

When the accused pleads guilty to a capital
offense, may he still present evidence in
his behalf?

478

J9JC9B0M

Rule 116
Arraignment And Plea

A.

Yes for the purpose of fixing the precise degree of
his culpability. (S3 R116). However if the evidence
presented by the accused is exculpatory, his plea
shall be deemed withdrawn and a plea of not guilty
shall be entered for him. (S1[d] R116).

Q.

What may the court do when the accused
pleads guilty to a non-capital offense?

A.

The court may receive evidence from the parties to
determine the penalty to be imposed. (S4 R116).76
Note that the reception of evidence is discretionary
unlike in the case of a plea of guilty to a
capital offense.

Q.

Charged with the crime of murder before the
Regional Trial Court of Bulacan, the accused,
assisted by counsel, pleaded guilty to the
charge. Thereupon, the trial court rendered a
judgment convicting the accused for the crime
of murder and sentencing him to suffer
reclusion perpetua and to pay civil indemnityto
the heirs of the victim. Did the trial court act
properly? Why? (93 Bar Q2)

A.

The trial court acted properly.
The duty of the court to conduct a searching
inquiry into the voluntarinessand full comprehension
of the consequences of the accused's plea and to
require the prosecution to prove his guilt and the
precise degree of culpability applies only to a capital
offense. Since the death penalty has been abolished

76The
Revised Guidelines on Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases provide
that "[i]f the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged in the information,
judgment shall be immediately rendered except in those cases involving capital
punishment." Apparently under the revised guidelines, the court should no longer
receive evidence but proceed forthwith to render judgment.

479

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

by the 1987 Constitution (effective 2 February 1987),
there is no longer any capital offense.77
Q.

May a plea of guilty be withdrawn and be
substituted by a plea of not guilty?

A.

Yes if the plea of guilt was improvident and
provided the judgment of conviction has not yet
become final. (S5 R 116). The withdrawal shall be
made with the permission of the court. The court
has the discretion to permit the withdrawal or not.

Q.

What are the grounds for the suspension of the
arraignment?

A.

Upon motion by the proper party, the arraignment
shall be suspended in the following cases: (PUP)
(a) The accused appears to be suffering from an
unsound mental condition which effectively
renders him unable to fully understand the
charge against him and to plead intelligently
thereto. In such case, the court shall order his
mental examination and, if necessary, his
confinement for such purpose.
(b) There exists a prejudicial question.
(c)

A petition for review of the resolution of the
prosecutor is pending at either the Department
of Justice, or the Office of the President;
provided, that the period of suspension shall
not exceed 60 days counted from the filing of
the petition with the reviewing office.

77Upon
the effectivity of the 1987 Constitution on 2 February 1987, the
death penalty was abolished. This was the situation at the time the bar question
was asked. The death penalty was reimposed by R.A. No. 7659 which took
effect on 31 December 1993. The death penalty was abolished again by R.A.
No. 9346 which took effect on 30 June 2006.

480

J9JC9B0M

RULE 117. MOTION TO QUASH
Q.

What is the period within which a motion to
quash may be filed?

A.

At any time before entering his plea, the accused
may move to quash the complaint or information.

Q.

What are the form and contents of a motion
to quash?

A.

The motion to quash shall be in writing, signed by
the accused or his counsel and shall distinctly
specify its factual and legal grounds. (82 R117).

Q.

May a courtconsider a ground other than those
stated in the motion to quash?

A.

No. The court shall consider no ground other than
those stated in the motion to quash, except lack of
jurisdiction over the offense charged. (82 R117).

Q.

May an oral motion to quash be considered by
the court?

A.

As a general rule, no. 82 R 117 states that a motion
to quash shall be in writing, signed by the accused or
his counsel and shall distinctly specify its factual and
legal grounds. However, an oral motion to quash
may be considered by the court if the ground is lack
of jurisdiction over the offense charged and such
lack of jurisdiction is apparent from the evidence on
record. (82 R117; see 81 R9). In fact, a criminal
court may consider motu proprio lack of jurisdiction
over the offense charged at any stage of the
proceedings. (Treas v. People, 25 January 2012).

481

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the grounds of a motion to quash?

A.

The grounds of a motion to quash are the following:
(JEJEMON FD)
(a) The facts charged do not constitute an offense.
(b) The court trying the case has no [urisdiction
over the offense charged.
(c)

The court trying the case has no jurisdiction
over the person of the accused.

(d) The Qfficer who filed the information had no
authority to do so.
(e) The complaint or information does not conform
substantially to the prescribed form.
(f)

More than one offense is charged except when
a single punishment for various offenses is
prescribed by law. (Multiplicitous complaint/
information).

(g) The criminal
gxtinguished.

action

or liability has

been

(h) The complaint or information contains averments
which, if true, would constitute a legal gxcuse
or justification.
(i)

The accused has previously been convicted or
acquitted of the offense charged, or the case
against him was terminated without his express
consent. (Double jeopardy).

Q.

Distinguisha motion to quash from a demurrer
to evidence.

A.

A motion to quash is distinguished from a demurrer
to evidence (823 R 119) as follows:

482

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

AS FOR TIME TO FILE. A motion to quash
should be filed before plea while a demurrer to
evidence is filed after the prosecution has rested
its case.
AS FOR GROUND/S. A motion to quash may
be filed on any of the grounds specified in S3 R117
while a demurrer to evidence is grounded on
insufficiency of evidence alone.
AS FOR LEAVE OF COURT. Leave of court
is not required of a motion to quash while leave
of court is necessary if the accused wants to retain
the right to present evidence in case of the
demurrer's denial.
Q.

If the motion to quash is sustained, should the
accused under custody be discharged?

A.

It depends.
If the court orders that another complaint or
information be filed, the accused, if in custody; shall
not be discharged unless admitted to bail. The
court however may not order the filing of another
complaint or information where the quashal was
based on extinction of the criminal action/liability or
on double jeopardy. (ED).
If no order to file another complaint or
information is made or if having been made, no
new complaint or information is filed within the time
specified in the order or within such further time as
the court may allow for good cause, the accused, if
in custody, shall be discharged unless he is also in
custody for another cause.

483

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is the order sustaining the motion to quash a bar
to another prosecutionfor the same offense?

A.

No. An order sustaining the motion to quash is not
a bar to another prosecution for the same offense.
The exceptions are if the motion to quash is
grounded on extinction of the criminal action or
liability or on double jeopardy. (ED).

Q.

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituin
who has been charged under RA 3019(Anti-Graft
and
Corrupt
Practices Act) before the
Sandiganbayan.While Angela has posted bail,
she has yet to be arraigned. Angela revealedto
you that she has not been investigated for any
offense and that it was only when police officers
showed up at her residence with a warrant of
arrest that she learned of the pending case
against her. She wonders why she has been
charged before the Sandiganbayanwhen she is
not in governmentservice.
a) What "before-trial" remedy would you invoke
in Angela's behalf to address the fact that
she had not been investigated at all, and
how would you avail of this remedy?
b) xxx (13 Bar Q7)

A.
a) The "before-trial" remedy I would invoke in
Angela's behalf is to file a motion to remand the
case to the investigating prosecutor for preliminary
investigation. I cannot file a motion to quash
the information since absence of a preliminary
investigation is not a ground of a motion to
quash nor will it justify petitioner's release

484

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

because such defect did not nullify the
information and the warrant of arrest against
her. Furthermore, the filing of charges and the
issuance of the warrant of arrest against a
person invalidly detained will cure the defect of
that detention or at least deny her the right to
be released because of such defect. (Larranaga
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 130644, 13
March 1998).
The motion to remand the case should be
availed of before Angela enters her plea. The fact
that Angela had posted bail shall not bar her from
assailing the regularity or questioning the absence
of a preliminary investigation, provided that she
raises them before entereing her plea. (826 R114).

Courl trying the case has no jurisdiction over the
offense charged
Q.

Macario Tolosa was accosted by the police
while walking along Rizal St., Malolos, Bulacan,
carrying a television set. Unable to give a
satisfactory explanation as to the ownership of
the TV set, Tolosa was brought to the police
precinct for further investigation. During the
interrogation,Tolosa broke down and confessed
that he is a member of the BABA Gang; that the
gang is engaged in in robbing houses in
Bulacan and other places; and that the TV set
he was carrying was his share of the loot that
week. Based on this confession and the results
of a preliminary investigation, the Provincial
Fiscal of Bulacan filed a criminal information for
robbery against Tolosa with the Regional Trial
Court of Bulacan.
485

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

In the course of the trial, the prosecution
presented as witness, Minda Casem with
address at 1970-D, Recto Avenue, Calamba,
Laguna. Casem testified that the TV set
belonged to her and proved her ownership by
her hand-written markings inside the TV set.
When cross-examined by Atty. Rafael Cortez,
counsel de oficio of the accused, Casem
testified that:
"ATTY. CORTEZ:
Q

You said that you own this TV set markedas
Exhibit "A." Wheredid you keep this TV set?

A In my apartment,sir.
Q

And where is your apartment located?

A 1970-D,RectoAvenue,Calamba,Laguna,sir.
Q

And where was this TV set stolen?

A Of course, in the sameaddress!"
Thereafter Atty. Rafael Cortez terminated
his cross-examination and the witness was
excused from the witness stand. Before the
prosecution could call its next witness, Atty.
Cortez orally moved for the quashal of the
information for robbery.
Was the motion to quash proper? Why? (83
Bar Q11).
A.

Yes, the motion to quash was proper.
The Supreme Court has held that venue is
jurisdictional in criminal cases. Here the testimony
of Ms. Casem showed that the venue of the
486

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

robbery was in Calamba, Laguna, where the crime
was committed. The fact that the TV set was taken
to Malolos, Bulacan, did not make it a venue since
robbery is not a continuing crime. Not having
jurisdiction over the offense charged, the court
must quash the information.
That the motion to quash was made after the
arraignment would not make the quashal improper
since lack of jurisdiction over the offense charged
may be raised at any stage. (See 89 R 117).
That the motion to quash was not in writing
would not matter. Lack of jurisdiction over the
offense charged may be considered by the court
even if not raised in a motion to quash. (S2 R117).
The Supreme Court has held that a criminal court
may consider motu proprio lack of jurisdiction over
the offense charged at any stage of the
proceedings. (Treas v. People, 25 January 2012).
Facts charged do not constitute an offense
Q.

What is the test to determine whether the facts
charged in complaint or information constitute
an offense?

A.

The test to determine whether or not the facts
charged in the complaint or information constitute
an offense is to ask whether the facts alleged, if
hypotheticallyadmitted, would establishthe essential
elements of the crime charged. If the answer is yes,
then the motion to quash should be denied. The
truth of the allegations is not material in determining
the sufficiency of the motion to quash but is
something to be established by the evidence
adduced during the trial. The test focuses solely on

487

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the allegations of the complaint or information and
evidence aliunde is not considered. (Domingo v.
Sandiganbayan, 322 SCRA 655 [2000]).
Q.

What shall the court do if the motion to quash is
based on the ground that the facts charged do
not constitute an offense?

A.

The court shall give the prosecution an opportunity
to correct the defect by amendment. If the
prosecution fails to make the amendment or the
complaint or information still suffers from the same
defect despite the amendment, the court shall grant
the motion to quash. (S4 R117).

No jurisdiction over the offense charged
Q. What are the requisities in order that the court
would have jurisdictionover the offense charged?
A.

The requisites in order that the court would have
jurisdiction over the offense charged are: (JV)
(1) The offense charged is one which the court is
by law conferred to take cognizance of
(subject-matter jurisdiction); and
(2) The offense must have been committed within
the court's territorial jurisdiction (venue). This
is consonant with the principle that venue in
criminal cases is jurisdictional.

No jurisdiction over the accused'sperson
Q.

How does a court acquire jurisdiction over the
person of the accused?

A.

Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
acquired either by his lawful arrest or by his

488

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

voluntary appearance in court. The voluntary
appearance of the accused may be made by the
filing of a pleading or motion in court. However if
the motion to quash was precisely and exclusively
to challenge the jurisdiction of the court over the
accused's person under S3(b) R117, the accused
is not deemed to have made a voluntary
appearance.
Q.

Two days after the killing of Y, the police
accompanied by the eyewitness W arrested X in
his house after he was pointed to by W as the
culprit. Inquest proceedings were held and the
information for homicide was subsequently
filed against X. X is under detention in the city
jail and his arraignmentwill be held 3 days later.
You had just been engaged to represent the
accused. What remedies will you avail of in
order to obtain the speedy release from
detention of X and in order to dismiss the
criminal case against him?

A.

In order to obtain the speedy release of X, I will file
an application for bail with the trial court. X is
entitled to bail as a matter of right since homicide is
not punishable by reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment.
In order to dismiss the criminal case against X,
I would file a motion to quash the information on the
ground that the court did not acquire jurisdiction
over the person of the accused. Jurisdiction over
the person of the accused is obtained either by his
lawful arrest or his voluntary appearance in court.
Here there was an unlawful warrantless arrest since
the same took place 2 days after the commission of
the crime. The application for bail does not result in
489

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the waiver of objections to the illegality of the
arrest. (826 R114).
Q.

The accused filed a motion to quash the
information on the grounds that the court had
no jurisdiction over his person, that the court
had no jurisdiction over the offense charged,
and that the officer who filed the information
had no authority to do so. Is the accused
deemed to have waived the objection to lack of
personal jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. The rule is that if the accused objects to the
jurisdiction of the court over his person, he may move
to quash the information, but only on that ground. If,
as in this case, the accused raises other grounds in
the motion to quash, he is deemed to have waived
that objection and to have submitted his person to the
jurisdiction of that court. (Larranaga v. Court of
Appeals, 287 SCRA 581 [1998]; Sanchez v.
Demetriou, 227 SCRA 627 [1993]).78

Officer who filed the information had no authority
to do so
Q.

The prosecutor filed an information charging
the accused with seduction. No complaintwas
filed by the private offended party. What is the
ground of the motion to quash?

7811
is submitted that this doctrine should be re-examined. The accused
who has valid grounds to quash aside from lack of personal jurisdiction would be
confronted with a dilemma. If he includes the other grounds aside from lack of
personal jurisdiction, he is deemed to have waived the ground of lack of personal
jurisdiction. On the other hand if he does not include them, he is deemed to have
waived these other grounds. (89 R117). It seems anomalous that a defendant
in a civil case would have a better right than an accused in a criminal case. (See
820 R14).

490

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

A.

The ground of the motion to quash is lack of
jurisdiction over the offense charged and not lack of
authority of the prosecutor to file the information.
The reason is that in crimes which cannot be
prosecuted de oficio, the complaint of the private
offended party is jurisdictional. (People v. Duran,
107 Phil. 979). Hence this ground is not waived
even if not raised before plea.

Q.

BC is charged with illegal possession of
firearms under an Information signed by a
Provincial Prosecutor. After arraignment but
before pre-trial, BC found out that the Provincial
Prosecutor had no authority to sign and file the
information as it was the City Prosecutor who
has such authority. During the pre-trial, BC
moves that the case against him be dismissed
on the ground that the Information is defective
because the officer signing it lacked the
authorityto do so. The Provincial Prosecutor
opposes the motion on the ground of estoppel
as BC did not move to quash the Information
before arraignment. If you are counsel for BC,
what is your argument to refute the opposition
of the Provincial Prosecutor? (2000 Bar Q10).

A.

I would argue that the information is invalid and
hence the court- did not acquire jurisdiction over
the case.
The Supreme Court has held that an information
filed by a qualified and authorized officer is required
for the jurisdiction of the court over the case;
consequently the objection that the officer who filed
the information has no authority to do so may still be
raised after plea as the issue of jurisdiction is
involved. (Villa v. Ibanez, 88 Phil. 402; Cudia v. Court
491

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of Appeals, 284 SCRA 173 [1998J; People v. Gartin,
G.R. No. 153176, 29 March 2004). 9
Here the information was filed by the Provincial
Prosecutor who had no authority to do so since it
was the City Prosecutor who had such authority.
Hence the accused is not estopped since the issue
of jurisdiction is involved. (See Cudia v. Court of
Appeals, supra).
Q.

Pedrito and Tomas, Mayor and Treasurer,
respectively, of the Municipality of San Miguel,
Leyte, are charged before the Sandiganbayan
for violation of Section 3(e), Republic Act No.
3019(Anti-Graft and Corrupt PracticesAct). The
information alleges, among others, that the two
conspired in the purchase of several units of
computer through personal canvass instead of
a public bidding, causing undue injury to the
municipality.
Before arraignment,the accused moved for
reinvestigation of the charge, which the court
granted. After reinvestigation,the Office of the
Special Prosecutorfiled an amendedinformation
duly signed and approved by the Special
Prosecutor, alleging the same delictual facts,
but with an additional allegation that the
accused gave unwarranted benefits to SB
Enterprises owned by Samuel.Samuelwas also
indicted under the amendedinformation.
Before Samuelwas arraigned, he moved to
quash the amended information on the ground
that the officer who filed the same had no
An informative discussion on the matter is found in People v. Gartin.

79

492

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

authorityto do so. Resolve the motion to quash
with reasons. (09 Bar Q4)
A.

The motion to quash should be granted.
Under S4 R112, no complaint or information
may be filed by an investigating prosecutor without
the prior written authority or approval of the
provincial or city prosecutoror chief state prosecutor
or the Ombudsman or his deputy.
The Special Prosecutor is not mentioned
among those authorized to approve the filing of
complaints or information. Hence the Office of the
Special Prosecutor had no authority to file the
information and the motion to quash should be
granted. (Perez v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 166062,
26 September 2006).

Q. Charged with the offense of slight physical
injuries under an information duly filed with the
MeTC in Manila which in the meantime had duly
issued an order declaring that the case shall be
governed by the Revised Rule on Summary
Procedure, the accused filed with said court a
motion to quash on the sole ground that the
officer who filed the information had no
authorityto do so. The MeTC denied the motion
on the ground that it is a prohibited motion
under the said Rule. Was the MeTC's ruling
correct? (Based on 04 Bar Qb).
A.

The MeTC's ruling was not correct. The Supreme
Court has held that an information filed by a
qualified and authorized officer is required for the
jurisdiction of the court over the case.

493

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Hence the motion to quash filed by the
accused was in effect based on lack of jurisdiction
over the offense. It is thus an exception to the rule
that a motion to quash is a prohibited motion under
the Rule on Summary Procedure.
Duplicitouslmultiplicitous
Q.

complaint or information

Rodolfo is charged with possession of
unlicensedfirearms in an informationfiled in the
Regional Trial Court. It was alleged therein that
Rodolfo was in possession of two unlicensed
firearms: a .45 caliber and a .32caliber.
Under Republic Act No. 8294, possession
of an unlicensed .45 caliber gun is punishable
by prision mayor in its minimum period and a
fine of P30,000, while possession of an
unlicensed .32 caliber gun is punishable by
prision correccional in its maximum period and
a fine of not less than P15,000.
As counsel for the accused, you intend to
file a motion to quash the information. What
ground or grounds should you invoke? Explain.
(05 Bar Q13).

A.

The grounds of the motion to quash which I should
invoke are: (1) the information is duplicitous, that
is, it charges more than one offense; and (2) the
court has no jurisdiction over the offense charged.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
information may be quashed if it charges more than
one offense.
Here the information charges two offenses.'
one possession of an unlicensed .45 caliber gun

494

- -- 

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

and another, possession of an unlicensed .32
caliber gun.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
information may be quashed on the ground that the
court has no jurisdiction over the offense charged.
Under the Law on Jurisdiction, the MTC has
original and exclusive jurisdiction over offenses
punishableby imprisonmentnot exceedingsix years.
Here the penalty for the possession of an
unlicensed .32 caliber gun is punishable by prision
correccional in its maximum period or six years.
Hence the prescribed penalty does not exceed six
years and thus the Regional Trial Court has no
jurisdiction.
Double jeopardy
Q.

What is double jeopardy?

A.

Double jeopardy refers to the situation wherein the
accused, after having been previously convicted or
acquitted of an offense or the proceedings against
him terminated without his express consent, is
again charged with the same offense. (S3[i] R117).
It is a ground for a motion to quash.

Q.

State the constitutional provision on double
jeopardy.

A.

No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of
punishment for the same offense. If an act is
punished by a law and an ordinance, conviction or
acquittal under either shall constitute a bar to
another prosecution for the same act. (Sec. 21, Art.
111, Constitution).
495

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the requisitesof doublejeopardy?

A.

The requisites of double jeopardy are the following:
(C JIPS)
(a) The accused had been _gonvicted or acquitted or
the case against him terminated without his
express consent;
(b) By a court of competent jurisdiction:
(c) Upon a valid complaint or information sufficient
in form and substance to sustain a conviction;
(d) After the accused had pleaded to the charge; and
(e) The second prosecution is for the offense charged
in the former complaint or information, or for any
2ttempt to commit the same or frustration
thereof, or for any offense which necessarily
includes or is necessarily included in the offense
charged in the former complaint or information
(FAN). (Same offense) (87 R117).

Conviction, acquittal, or terminationwithout express
consent
Q.

An accused was discharged to be a state
witness against his co-accused in a case of
murder. May the accused be prosecuted later
on for the same crime of murder?

A.

No. The discharge of the accused to be a state
witness operates as an acquittal of the discharged
accused and shall be a bar to future prosecution for
the same offense, unless the accused fails or
refuses to testify against his co-accused in
accordance with his sworn statement constituting
the basis for his discharge. (818 R119).

496

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Q.

When would double jeopardy apply even if the
termination of the case was with the express
consent of the accused?(DS)

A.

Q.

(1)

Dismissal of the case upon a demurrer to
evidence (S23 R 119; People v. City of Silay,
G.R. No. L-43790, 9 December 1976).

(2)

Dismissal based on the denial of the
accused's right to a speedy trial (S9 R119;
People v. Pablo, 98 SCRA 289).

X was chargedwith the violation of B.P. Big. 22
for issuing a check which was dishonored
because X's bank account had already been
closed even before the date of the check. X
pleaded not guilty. After trial, the judge
promulgateda decision dismissing the case on
the ground that the information was fatally
defective since it did not allege that X had
knowledgethat he would haveno sufficient funds
to fully pay for the check upon its presentment.
(a)

Was the decision of the trial judge correct?

(b) May the prosecution appeal from the
judgment of acquittal?
A.

(a) The decision of the trial judge was erroneous.
It is not necessary for the information to allege
that X had knowledge that he would have no
sufficient funds to fully pay for the check upon its
presentment because such knowledge by the
accused is already presumed if the check is
dishonored when presented within 90 days from
date thereof. (Sec. 2, B.P. Big. 22).
497

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b)

No the prosecution may not challenge the
decision by a petition for certiorari. Although
the decision was erroneous, that decision may
not be annulled or set aside because it
amounted to a judgment of acquittal. It became
final and executory upon its promulgation. The
State may not appeal that decision for it would
place the accused twice in jeopardy of
punishment for the offense in violation of his
constitutional right against double jeopardy
(Art. 111, Sec. 21, 1987 Constitution).

Since X had been arraigned, pleaded "not
guilty," and was tried upon a valid and sufficient
information (although the lower court erroneously
thought otherwise) and the case against him was
dismissed by decision of the trial court (hence,
without his consent and not upon his motion), he has
been placed in jeopardy or danger of punishment for
the offense charged. To re-assess the evidence
against him pursuant to the Government's appeal,
would place him twice in jeopardy of punishment for
the same offense. (People v. Laggui, G.R. No.
76262-63, 16 March 1989).
Q.

X committed falsificationof public document as
a necessary means to commit estafa. An
information for estafa was filed against X to which
he pleaded not guilty. Subsequently while the
first case was pending, another information for
falsification of public document was filed
against X. X moved to quash the second case
on the ground of double jeopardy, arguing that
there was complex crime and to charge him
later of a component crime thereof would be to
charge her of the same offense.
498

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

(a) Should the motion to quash on the ground
of double jeopardy be granted?
(b) If not, may a motion to quash on another
ground prosper?
A.

(a) The motion to quash should be denied.
In order for double jeopardy to arise, the first
charge against the accused must have resulted in a
conviction, acquittal, or a termination without his
express consent.
Here the first case is still pending. Hence
double jeopardy may not be invoked. (People v.
Pineda, 219 SCRA 1, G.R. No. 44205, 16 February
1993, e.b.).80
(b) Yes a motion to quash on the ground that the
court has no jurisdiction to try the offense
would prosper.
The Supreme Court has held that once
jurisdiction is acquired by the court in which the
information is filed, it is there retained. Therefore,
as the offense of falsification was included in the
charge for estafa pending before the first court
(since there was actually a complex crime of estafa
through falsification of public document), the
second court clearly had no jurisdiction over the
criminal case filed before it, the first court having
retained jurisdiction over the offense to the
exclusion of all other courts. ( See Heirs of
Honrales v. Honrales, G.R. No. 182651, 25 August
2010). This may be called the doctrine of
exclusionaryjurisdiction.

A vigorous dissent was penned by Justice Florenz D. Regalado.
Nonetheless the Pineda ruling is still the ruling case law.
80

499

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is a nolle prosequi?

A.

A nolle prosecui is the voluntary dismissal or
withdrawal of a criminal information by the
prosecution. It requires court approval. (See Galvez
v. Court of Appeals, 237 SCRA 685 [1994]).

Q.

When a criminal case is dismissed on no/le
prosequi, can it later be refiled? (03 Bar Q15).

A.

It depends. If the accused had not yet been
arraigned, the criminal case can later be refiled as
the accused would not be placed in double
jeopardy. It is a general rule that a nolle prosequi or
dismissal entered before the accused is placed on
trial and before he is called on to plead is not
equivalent to an acquittal, and does not bar a
subsequent prosecution for the same offense. It is
not a final disposition of the . case. Rather, it
partakes of the nature of a nonsuit or
discontinuance in a civil suit and leaves the matter
in the same condition in which it was before the
commencement of the prosecution. (Galvez v.
Court of Appeals, 237 SCRA 685 [1994]).
If the accused had already been arraigned, the
criminal case c annot later be refiled as it would
place the accused in double jeopardy, unless the
accused expressly consented to the dismissal or
withdrawal of the information.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
accused would be placed in double jeopardy if the
criminal case for the same offense had been
dismissedor terminatedwithout his expressconsent.

500

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Court of competent jurisdiction
Q.

Respondent Jonathan Honrales was charged
with parricide before the RTC of Manila for the
fatal shooting of his wife Jane. Respondentfiled
a motion for reconsiderationof the prosecutor's
resolution finding probable cause for parricide.
The city prosecutor granted the motion and
directed the withdrawal of the information for
parricide and the filing of an information for
reckless imprudence resulting in parricide.
The prosecutor thus filed with the RTCa motion
to withdraw the information for parricide.
While this motion to withdraw was pending
with the RTC, an information for reckless
imprudence resulting in parricide was filed
against the Respondent with the MeTC.
Meanwhile the appeal of Petitioners (Jane's
heirs) to the DOJ from the city prosecutor's
resolution withdrawing the information was
denied. At the arraignment before the MeTC,
Respondent pleaded guilty and was sentenced
to imprisonment of one year, 7 months and 11
days to 2 years, 10 months, and 20 days. Later,
the RTC issued an order granting the motion
to withdraw the information relying upon the
DOJ resolution. The Petitioners' motion for
reconsiderationwas denied.
The Petitioners then filed a petition for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals challenging
the RTC'sorder granting the motion to withdraw
information. The CA dismissed the petition for
certiorari.Though it found that the RTCjudge had
failed to makean independentassessmentof the
merits of the case and thus abdicatedhis judicial
501

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

power and acted as a mere surrogate of the
Secretary of Justice, it ruled that the remand of
the case to the RTC would violate Respondent's
right against doublejeopardy. Would the remand
of the case to the RTC violate the Respondent's
right to doublejeopardy?
A.

No. In this case, the MeTC took cognizance of the
information for reckless imprudence resulting in
parricide while the criminal case for parricide was
still pending before the RTC. Once jurisdiction is
acquired by the court in which the Information is
filed, it is there retained. Therefore, as the offense
of reckless imprudence resulting in parricide was
included
in
the
charge
for
intentional
parricide pending before the RTC, the MeTC clearly
had no jurisdiction over the criminal case filed
before it, the RTC having retained jurisdiction over
the offense to the exclusion of all other courts. The
requisite of double jeopardy that the judgment is
rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction is
absent. Hence the remand of the case to the RTC
for trial would not amount to double jeopardy.
(Heirs of Honrales v. Honrales, G.R. No. 182651,
25 August 2010).

Q.

Wife filed a complaintfor bigamyagainst husband
and Ms. X. The information for bigamy was filed
against the husband and Ms. X (petitioners).
The appearanceof private prosecutorfor the wife
was denied by the Regional Trial Court. The
wife filed a petition for certiorari with prayer for
TRO/preliminary injunction with the Court of
Appeals,which issued the TRO. Despitethe TRO
issued by the CA, trial of the bigamy case
proceeded with the presentation of the
prosecution's evidence,to which husbandfiled a
502

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

demurrer to evidence. In an order dated 5
September2006,the RTC dismissed the bigamy
case for failure of the prosecution to prove the
petitioners'guilt. In a decision dated 30 July 2010,
the CA granted Amelia's petition and annulled
the RTC's 3 March 2006 resolution disqualifying
Atty. Atenciafrom participationin the case,and its
5 September2006order that dismissedthe bigamy
case against the petitioners. The petitioners
contend that the CA's order, setting aside
the RTC's dismissal order, violated their right
against double jeopardy. Is the petitioners'
contentioncorrect?
A.

No. The RTC issued its 5 September 2006 order in
defiance of the TRO issued by the CA. The records
show that the CA had issued a TRO on April 19,
2006, which should have prohibited the RTC from
further proceeding on the case. But the RTC, instead,
continued with the presentation of the prosecution's
evidence and issued the assailed 5 September 2006
order. Under this circumstance, the RTC's 5
September 2006 dismissal order was actually without
force and effect and would not serve as basis for the
petitioners to claim that their right against double
jeopardy had been violated. The RTC acted with
grave abuse of discretion in issuing its 5 September
2006 order in view of the earlier TRO issued by the
CA. (Villalon v. Chan, 24 September 2014).

Q.

A, B, C, and D were convicted of murder by the
RTC. Only D personally appeared during the
promulgation of the judgment. Subsequently
without surrendering and explaining the reasons
for their absence, A, B, and C joined D in their
joint motion for reconsideration. The RTC took
cognizanceof the joint motion for reconsideration
503

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

and later issued an order acquitting A and B and
downgrading the conviction of C and D from
murder to homicide. The People filed a special
civil action for certiorari with the Court of Appeals
to annul the order. A, B, C, and D argued that the
petition for certiorari would place them in double
jeopardy. Was their argument correct?

A.

A, B, and C's .argument was not correct.
Under S6 R120, the accused who fails to
appear without justifiable cause during the
promulgation shall lose the remedies available in
the Rules of Court against the judgment and the
court shall order his arrest. However within 15 days
from promulgation of the judgment, the accused
may surrender and file a motion for leave of court to
avail of these remedies.
Here the RTC clearly exceeded its jurisdiction
when it not only failed to cause the arrest of A, B,
and C who were at large but also took cognizance
of their joint motion despite the fact that they did not
surrender and file a motion for leave to avail of
remedies. Hence A, B, and C were not placed in
double jeopardy because the RTC acted without
jurisdiction and thus its order was void.
However D was correct in his argument that
the petition for certiorari would place him in double
jeopardy. He was in custody and present at the
promulgation of the judgment. Hence the RTC
never lost jurisdiction over his person and thus the
RTC's ruling downgrading his conviction from
murder to homicide stands. (People v. De Grano,
G.R. No. 167710, 5 June 2009).


504

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Q.

Private respondents filed with the Pasay City
Prosecutora complaintfor violation of Sec. 7 4 of
the CorporationCodeagainstPetitionerswho are
the president and corporate secretary of
STRADEC, a domestic corporation. Private
respondents alleged that Petitioners refused to
make available to them the stock and transfer
book of STRADEC.
After preliminaryinvestigation,
the criminal complaint was filed with the
MetropolitanTrial Court of Pasay City. On the
same date, the petitionersfiled an Urgent Motion
for Judicial Determinationof ProbableCauseand
to Defer the Issuance of Warrants of Arrest
Pending Determinationwith the MTC. The MTC
denied the motion and subsequent motion for
reconsideration.
Petitioners filed a petition for certiorari
under R65 with the Regional Trial Court of
Pasay City, which was raffled to Branch 154.
Petitioners were arraigned in the MTC case. In
an order dated 4 June 2007, the RTC-Branch
154, granted the petition holding that there was
no probable cause to hold the petitioners for
trial. Consequently, it directed the MTC to
dismiss the criminal case want of probable
cause. The private respondents thereafter
sought reconsiderationbut it was denied by the
RTC-Branch154. Thus, they brought an appeal
to the SC via a petition for review on certiorari
(docketed as G.R. No. 180416) raising pure
questions of law. While G.R. No. 180416was
pending, the MTCdismissed Criminal Case No.
89724,pursuant to the RTC-Branch154's Order.
The private respondents thereafter filed a
motion for reconsideration, which the MTC
505

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

granted. Upon learning that a petition for
certiorari had been filed before the SC, the MTC
issued an order (order of Revival) recalling the
order of Dismissal and reinstating the criminal
information in Criminal Case No. 89724. The
Petitioners argue that the order of revival would
place them in double jeopardy. Is the Petitioners'
argument correct?
A.

No. Under 87 R117, in order that there will be
double jeopardy, the conviction, acquittal, or
termination must be made by a court of competent
jurisdiction. Once the case has been appealed and
given due course by this Court, the lower court or
the court of origin could no longer take cognizance
of the issue under review. It cannot execute the
judgment appealed from because to do so would
constitute encroachment on the exclusive appellate
jurisdiction of this Court. Since the MTC clearly had
no jurisdiction to issue the Order of Dismissal, there
can be no double jeopardy. (Quiambao v. People,
17 September 2014 ).

Accused had pleaded to the first charge
Q.

The accused pleadedguilty to homicide. Allowed
to prove mitigating circumstances,the accused
instead testified that he acted in self-defense. No
plea of not guilty was entered for the accused.
The accused was acquitted based on his
testimony. The prosecution appealed from the
judgment. The accused opposed the appeal on
the ground of double jeopardy. Would the appeal
placethe accused in doublejeopardy?

A.

No. When the accused pleads guilty but presents
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be deemed
506

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be entered
for him. Here the defendant presented exculpatory
evidence when he testified on self-defense, thus
the effect is that his earlier guilty plea was deemed
withdrawn. Since there was no standing plea, the
appeal by the prosecution would not place the
accused in double jeopardy. (S1(d) R116; People v.
Balisacan, G.R. No. L-26376, 31 August 1966).
Q.

X was charged with two counts of raping his
daughter. Upon arraignment, X pleaded guilty
but bargained for a lesser penalty for each case.
Complainant'smother and the public prosecutor
agreed with the plea bargain. Hence the trial
court rendered judgment sentencing X to ten
years for each count of rape.
(a) Was there a proper plea bargaining?
(b)

If not, what should the court have done?

(c) After three months, the cases against X were
revivedat the-instance of the complainanton
the ground that the penalty imposed was
"too light." X was re-arraignedand he entered
a new plea of guilty. After the required
proceedingsfor capitaloffenseand convinced
of X's voluntariness in pleading guilty, the
trial court convicted X and sentencedhim to
death. On appeal, X contends that the rearraignment and trial on the same
information violated his right against double
jeopardy. Is X's contention correct?

507

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
(a) No. X's plea is not the plea bargaining
contemplated and allowed by law and the rules
of procedure. The only instance where a plea
bargaining is allowed under the Rules is when
an accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense
pursuant to 82 R116. Here, the reduction of the
penalty is only a consequence of the plea of
guilt to a lesser penalty.
It must be emphasized that X did not plead to
a lesser offense but pleaded guilty to the rape
charges and only bargained for a lesser penalty. In
short he did not plea bargain but made conditions
on the penalty to be imposed. This is erroneous
because by pleading guilty to the offense charged,
accused-appellant should be sentenced to the
penalty to which he pleaded. (People v. Magat,
G.R. No. 130026, 31 May 2000, e.b.)
(b) The court should have vacated X's plea and
entered a plea of not guilty for him.
When the accused refused to plead or makes
a conditional plea, a plea of not guilty shall be
entered for him. (S1[c] R116).
Here X made a conditional plea by admitting his
guilt provided that a certain penalty will be meted
upon him. Hence the court should have entered a
plea of not guilty. (People v. Magat, supra).
(c) No, X's contention is not correct.
The judgment rendered by the trial court which
was based on a void plea bargaining is also void ab
initio and can not be considered to have attained
finality for the simple reason that a void judgment

508

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

has no legality from its inception. Thus, since the
judgment of conviction rendered against accusedappellant is void, double jeopardy will not lie.
(People v. Magat, supra).
Same offense
Q.

The Constitution provides that "[n]o person
shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment for
the same offense." What is the meaning of
same offense in the constitutionalprovision?

A.

A person is being twice put in jeopardy of
punishment for the same offense when the second
prosecution is for:
(1)

the offense charged in the former complaint or
information, or

(2)

any 2ttempt to commit the same or frustration
thereof, or;

(3)

any offense which necessarily includes or
is necessarily included in the offense charged
in the former complaint or information. (fan)
(S7R117).

Q. When does an offense subject of the second
prosecution necessarily include the offense
charged in the former complaint or information?

A.

An offense subject of the second prosecution (second
offense) necessarily includes the offense charged in
the former complaint or information (first offense)
when some of the essential elements or ingredients
of the second offense, as alleged in the complaint or
information, constitute the first offense. ( See S5
R120). For instance if the accused had been
acquitted of serious physical injuries, he cannot be

509

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

charged thereafter with frustrated homicide arising
from the same assault upon the victim which resulted
in the serious physical injuries.
Q.

When is an offense subject of the second
prosecution necessarily included in the offense
charged in the former complaintor information?

A.

An offense subject of the second prosecution
( second offense) is necessarily included the offense
charged in the former complaint or information (first
offense) when some of the essential ingredients of
the second offense, as alleged in the complaint or
information, form part of those constituting the first
offense.
(See S5 R120). For instance if the
accused had been acquitted of frustrated homicide,
he cannot be charged thereafter with serious
physical injuries arising from the same assault
upon the victim which resulted in the frustrated
homicide charge.

Q.

The accused was convicted of illegal sale of
opium. Subsequently a charge of illegal possession
of opium involving the same tins of opium sold
was brought against the accused. May the
accused invoke double jeopardy on the ground
that he is being put twice in jeopardy for the
same offense?

A.

Yes. The second charge of illegal possession of
opium was absorbed or necessarily included in the
first charge of illegal sale since the same tins of
opium were involved in both prosecutions. (U.S. v.
Luk Chaw, 18 Phil. 513).81

81See
interesting case of People v. De Jesus, 145 SCRA 521, 13
November 1986, wherein it was held that illegal possession of marijuana was
absorbed in illegal sale of marijuana although the accused had 32 more sticks
than the 5 sticks he sold to the poseur-buyer.

510

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Q.

X was acquitted of illegal fishing through the use
of explosives. Subsequently a charge of illegal
possession of explosives involving the same
explosives used in the illegal fishing case was
brought againstX. MayX invokedoublejeopardy?

A.

Yes, the second charge of illegal possession of
explosives was necessarily included or absorbed in
the first charge since the same explosives were
involved. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 333 [61h rev. ed.]).

Q.

The accused were prosecuted for malicious
mischief under an information charging that
actuated by hate and resentmentfor complainant
they conspired to remove the banguera and
media agua from the complainant's house. The
first charge was dismissed upon a demurrer filed
by the accusedsince the prosecutionwas unable
to prove that the accused were actuated by hate
or resentmentwhen they removed the banguera
and media agua. Subsequently the prosecutor
brought another charge for coercion under an
information alleging that the accused prevented
the complainant from leaving intact his house
since they forcibly removedthe banguera and the
media agua. The accused moved to quash the
second charge on the ground of double jeopardy.
The prosecution countered that the second
charge although from the same act is for a
different offense.Was there doublejeopardy?

A.

Yes. It is quite clear, even from a cursory
comparison of the two informations, that the act
complained of in the case for coercion is the same
which formed the basis of the information for
511

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

malicious mischief. In straight language, the
defendants were first charged with malicious
mischief for having removed and destroyed the
"banguera" and "media agua" of Felix Verzosa. In
straight language too, if the latter was prevented,
as alleged in the information for coercion, from
leaving intact his house, it is because the
defendants had removed therefrom the "banguera"
and "media agua."
While the rule against double jeopardy
prohibits prosecution for the same offense, it
seems elementary that an accused should be
shielded against being prosecuted for several
offenses made out from a single act. Otherwise,
an unlawful act or omission may give rise to several
prosecutions depending upon the ability of the
prosecuting officer to imagine or concoct as many
offenses as can be justified by said act or omission,
by simply adding or subtracting essential elements.
Under the theory of appellant, the crime of rape
may be converted into a crime of coercion, by
merely alleging that by force and intimidation the
accused prevented the offended girl from remaining
a virgin. (People v. Del Carmen, G.R. No. L-3459,
9 January 1951).
Q.

X was prosecuted and convicted for the violation
of B.P. Big. 22 for issuing a bouncing check.
Subsequently a second charge for estafa under
Article 315(2)(d) of the Revised Penal Code
involving the same bouncing check was brought
against X. May X invoke double jeopardy?

A.

No. The second prosecution while arising from the
same act is for a different offense. There are
512

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

several differences between B.P. Big. 22 and
Article 315(2)(d) of the RPC, one of which is that
the violation of B.P. Big. 22 is ma/um prohibitum
while that of Article 315(2)(d) is ma/um in se.
(Nierras v. Dacuycuy, 181 SCRA 1 ). The doctrine of
absorption may not be applied since Section 5 of
B.P. Big. 22 expressly provides that prosecution
under B.P. Big. 22 shall be without prejudice to any.
liability for violation of any provision of the Revised
Penal Code. (Anti-absorption clause).
Q.

Accused was charged with estafa through the
issuance of a bouncing check under Article
315(2)(d) of the Revised Penal Code. The
evidence failed to prove that there was fraud in
the issuance of the check and thus the accused
could not be held liable for estafa. May the
accused be instead convicted of the violation of
B.P. Big. 22?

A.

No. Accused cannot be convicted of a crime for
which she was not properly charged, for that would
violate appellants constitutional right to be informed
of the accusation against her. The violation of BP 22
is not necessarily included in the crime of estafa
under Article 315, 2(d). The offense of fraud defined
under the Revised Penal Code is ma/um in
se, whereas BP 22 is a special law which punishes
the issuance of bouncing checks, a ma/um
prohibitum. Fraud or estafa under the Revised Penal
Code is a distinct offense from the violation of the
Bouncing Checks Law. They are different offenses,
having different elements. In this case, since
accused is accused of violating a particular provision
of the Revised Penal Code on estafa, she may not
be convicted for violation of BP 22 without trenching
513

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on fundamental fairness. (People v. Cuyugan, G.R.
Nos. 146641-43, 18 November 2012).82
Q.

X a DECS officer was charged with falsification
of public document under Art. 171 of the
Revised Penal Code under an information which
alleged that he falsified an inspection report to
make it appear that materials were delivered to
the DECS. X was acquitted. Subsequently an
information was filed against X for the violation
of Section 3(e) of R.A. No. 3019 for causing
undue injury to the government, based on the
same act of falsifying the inspection report. X
filed a motion to quash on the ground of double
jeopardy, arguing that he was being prosecuted
anew for the same offense. Should the motion
be granted?

A.

No. Art. 171 of the RPC and Section 3(e) of R.A.
No. 3019 are not the same since there is no identity
of elements between them. (Suero v. People, G.R.
No. 156408, 31 January 2005). It should also be
noted that falsification of a public document is
ma/um in se while the violation of Section 3(e) is a
ma/um prohibitum. More importantly, Section 3 of
R.A. No. 3019 contains an "anti-absorption clause"
which reads thus:
SEC. 3. Corrupt practices of public officers. - - ln
addition to acts or omissions of public officers already
penalized by existing laws, the following shall constitute
corrupt practices of any public officer and are hereby
declared to be unlawful. (Underscoring supplied).

82Compare
with People v. Chua, 315 SCRA 326 (1999) wherein accused
was charged and convicted of estafa under Article 315(2)(d) of the Revised
Penal Code. On appeal, the SC acquitted the accused since the checks issued
were in payment of a pre-existing obligation but convicted her of the violation of
B.P. Big. 22. It is submitted that Cuyugan is the more persuasive ruling.

514

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Q.

X hacked a police officer with a bolo inflicting
less serious physical injuries upon him. X was
charged and convicted of less serious physical
injuries. Subsequently X was charged with
direct assault upon a person of authority based
on the same hacking incident. May X invoke
double jeopardy on the ground that he is being
charged anew with the same offense?

A.

Yes. The same-offense requirement was satisfied if
the subsequent indictment is for "any offense which
necessarily includes ... the offense charged in the
former complaint or information." Where the criminal
act of the accused results in a complex crime, such
as less serious physical injuries with direct assault,
but he was charged and convicted only of less
serious physical injuries, such conviction constitutes a
bar to another prosecution for direct assault. (Tacas
v. Cariaso, 72 SCRA 528 [1976]).

Q.

X stole 13 carabaos,8 of which belongedto 8 and
5 to C. The theft happenedat the same place and
time. X was prosecuted and convicted for the
theft of the 8 carabaos belonging to 8.
Subsequently X was prosecuted for theft of
the 5 carabaos belonging to C. May X invoke
doublejeopardy?

A.

Yes. The second prosecution is for the same
offense because the theft of the 8 carabaos is an
integral part of the single crime of theft of all the
carabaos. (People v. Tumlos, 67 Phil. 320).

Q.

X was charged and acquitted of intentional
parricide for shooting his wife. SubsequentlyX
was charged with reckless imprudence resulting

515

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

in parricide arising from the same shooting
incident. MayX invokedoublejeopardy?
A.

Yes. The reckless imprudence resulting in parricide
was included in the charge of intentional parricide.
(See Heirs of Honrales v. Honrales, G.R. No.
182651, 25 August 2010; Magno v. People, G.R.
No. 149725, 23 October 2003). What the court
should have done in the intentional parricide case
was to convict X of reckless imprudence resulting in
homicide if the evidence warranted it, pursuant to
the variance doctrine. (See Magno v. People, id.).

Q.

Following a collision, Petitioner Jason lvler was
charged with two offenses before the MeTC of
Pasig City: Reckless Imprudence Resulting in
Slight Physical Injuries (Crim. Case No. 82367)
for injuries suffered by Evangeline Ponce, and
Reckless Imprudence Resulting in Homicide for
the death of Nestor Ponce (Crim. Case No.
82366). Petitioner pleaded guilty to Crim. Case
No. 82367 and was meted the penalty of public
censure. Invoking this conviction, Petitioner
moved to quash Criminal Case No. 82366on the
ground of double jeopardy. Should Criminal
Case No. 82366be quashed?

A.

Yes. Criminal Case 82366 should be quashed since it
relates to the same offense. Reckless Imprudence is
a single crime and its consequences on persons and
property are material only to determine the penalty.
(/vier v. Modesto-San Pedro, 17 November 2010).

Q.

X was charged and convicted of physical
injuries through reckless imprudence. Later X
was charged with damage to property through

516

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

the same act of reckless imprudence, both
under Article 365 of the Revised Penal Code.
May X invoke double jeopardy on the ground
that he is being charged for the same offense?
A.

Yes. The essence of criminal negligence under
Article 365 is the imprudent or negligent act.
Hence the second prosecution is for the same
offense. (Buerano v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
30269, 9 July 1982).

Principle of Delito Continuado
Q.

DKT Phils. filed a complaint with the
Prosecutor's Office of Tagbilaran City (OPPBohol) against its manager Ana Navaja for
falsification of private document which was
docketed as I.S. No. 04-1238.In said preliminary
investigation,Ms. Magsigay,a materialwitness of
DKT, was subpoenaed to appear on 15 March
2004. However on 9 March 2004, petitioner
(husband of Ana Navaja) went to Magsigay's
workplace in Garden Cafe, Jagna, Bohol, and
falsely told Magsigaythat her attendancewas no
longer required.Magsigayno longer attendedthe
scheduled 15 March 2004 hearing where
petitioner and Atty. Bonghanoy presented an
affidavit purportedly executed by Ms. Magsigay
and notarized by a certain Atty. Rolando Grapa
(Atty. Grapa) in Cebu City, supporting Ana
Navaja'scounter-affidavit.Resultantly,I.S. No. 041238was dismissed.
Meanwhile, respondent Atty. Borje, DKT's
counsel, found out from Ms. Magsigay herself
that: (a) she would have attended the scheduled
517

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

15 March 2004 hearing were it not for the
misrepresentation of petitioner, (b) she was
merely told by her superior in Garden Cafe to
sign the affidavit and that she did not
personally preparethe same; and (c) she could
not have gone to Cebu to have it notarized
before Atty. Grapa as she was at work on that
day. This prompted Atty. Borje to file the
following criminal complaints before the OPPBohol and the City Prosecution Office of
TagbilaranCity: the first one, charging petitioner
of Obstruction of Justice, specifically, for
violation of Section 1 (a) of PD 1829 in
connection with the 9 March 2004 incident; and
the second one, charging petitioner and Atty.
Bonghanoy of Obstruction of Justice as well,
specifically, for violation of Section 1 (f) of the
same law in connection with the 15 March 15,
2004 incident. Sec. 1 (a) punishes the act of
preventing a witness from testifying in any
criminal proceedingwhile Sec. 1 (f) punishesthe
presentation of a falsified document in a
criminal investigation.
After due proceedings,separateInformations
were filed. The case relatingto the 9 March2004
incident was filed beforethe MCTC-Jagna,while
that relating to the 15 March 2004 incident was
filed beforethe MTCC-Tagbilaran.
Consequently, petitioner filed a Motion to
Quash Information before the MCTC-Jagna,
arguing that the charge of violation of Section
1 (a) of PD 1829 pending before it should
have been absorbed by the charge of violation
of Section 1 (f) pending before the MTCC518

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Tagbilaran, considering that: (a) the case
pending before the latter court was filed first;
(b) the criminal cases filed before the MCTCJagna and MTCC-Tagbilaranarose from a single
preliminary investigation proceeding, involving
the same set of facts and circumstances, and
flowed from a single alleged criminal intent,
which is to obstructthe investigation of I.S. No.
04-1238; and (c) to allow separate prosecutions
of the foregoing cases would be tantamount to
a violation of his right to double jeopardy.
Should the motion to quash be granted?
A.

Yes. While the informations pertain to acts that
were done days apart and in different locations, the
Court holds that petitioner should only be charged
and held liable for a single violation of PD 1829.
This is because the alleged acts, albeit separate,
were motivated by a single criminal impulse that is, to obstruct or impede the preliminary
investigation proceeding in I.S. Case No. 04-1238,
which was, in fact, eventually dismissed by the
OPP-Bohol. The foregoing conclusion is premised
on the principle of delito continuado, which
envisages a single crime committed through
a series of acts arising from one criminal intent
or resolution.
Thus, applying
the principle of delito
continuado, petitioner should only be charged with
one (1) count of violation of PD 1829 which may be
filed either in Jagna, Bohol where Ms. Magsigay
was allegedly prevented from appearing and
testifying in I.S. Case No. 04-1238, or in Tagbilaran
City, Bohol where petitioner allegedly presented a
false affidavit in the same case. However, since he
519

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

was already charged - and in fact, convicted in a
Judgment dated July 3, 2007 - in the MTCCTagbilaran, the case in MCTC-Jagna should be
dismissed as the events that transpired in Jagna,
Bohol should only be deemed as a partial execution
of petitioner's single criminal design. The criminal
case in MCTC-Jagnamust be dismissed;otherwise,
petitioner will be unduly exposed to double
jeopardy. (Navaja v. De Castro, 11 September
2017, Perlas-Bernabe,J.).
Q.

Section 7 of the Cybercrime Law provides that
prosecution thereunder is without prejudice to
liability under the Revised Penal Code and other
laws. Under the said law, online child
pornography is defined as the prohibited acts
under the Anti-Child Pornography Act committed
through a computer system while online libel is
defined as the libel defined under Article 355 of
the Revised Penal Code committed through a
computer system or any other similar means.
May the said provision be struck down as
unconstitutionalinsofar as it relates to online libel
and online child pornography?

A.

Yes. There should be no question that if the
published material on print, said to be libelous, is
again posted online or vice versa, that identical
material cannot be the subject of two separate
libels. The two offenses, one a violation of Article
353 of the Revised Penal Code and the other a
violation of Section 4(c)(4) of R.A. 10175 involve
essentially the same elements and are in fact one
and the same offense. Charging the offender under
both laws would be a blatant violation of the
constitutional proscription against double jeopardy.
520

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

The same observation also applies to online
child pornography which is already penalized under
the ACPA. (Disini v. Secretary of Justice, 18
February 2014).83
Q.

X was prosecuted for estafa and was convicted
under Article 315(2)(d) which penalizes the
issuance of a bouncing check. X appealed to
the Court of Appeals which convicted the
accused instead under Article 315(2)(a) (through
false pretenses or similar deceits). X invokes
double jeopardy, contending that since the trial
court had said that Article 315(2)(a) was not
applicable to him, he in effect was acquitted of
said provision and hence the appellate court
could not convict him thereunder. Is X's
contention correct?

A.

No. When X appealed from the sentence of the trial
court he waived the constitutional safeguard
against double jeopardy and threw the whole case
open to the review of the appellate court, which is
then called upon to render such judgment as the
law and justice dictate, whether favorable or not
and whether assigned as an error or not. (Ko Bu
Lin v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 57170, 19
November 1982).84

Q.

Appellant was charged with robbery with
homicide. The RTC convicted him of murder on
its finding that the Appellant could not have
committed robbery. He appealed to the Court of

83The
ruling is arguable. Double jeopardy is a ground to quash an
information or complaint, not a benchmark for legislation. The ruling seems to
have infringed on Congress's power to define and penalize offenses.
84Perusal
of Ko Bu Lin shows that the elements of estafa through false
pretenses was sufficiently averred in the information. Hence the accused could
be convicted of such crime on appeal.

521

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Appeals which modified the judgment by
convicting him of robbery with homicide.
Appellant maintained that the CA erred in finding
him liable for robbery with homicide as charged
in the amended information. He argued that his
appeal to the CA was limited to his conviction for
murder and excluded his acquittal for robbery
and that by appealing his conviction for murder,
he does not waive his constitutional right not to
be subject to double jeopardy for the crime of
robbery. He claimed that even assuming that the
RTC erred in acquitting him of the robbery
charge, such error can no longer be questioned
on appeal. Is the Appellant's argument meritorious?
A.

No. An appeal in a criminal case opens the entire
case for review on any question including one not
raised by the parties. When an accused appeals
from the sentence of the trial court, he waives the
constitutional safeguard against double jeopardy
and throws the whole case open to the review of
the appellate court, which is then called upon to
render such judgment as law and justice dictate,
whether favorable or unfavorable to the appellant.
In other words, when appellant appealed the RTC's
judgment of conviction for murder, he is deemed to
have abandoned his right to invoke the prohibition
on double jeopardy since it became the duty of the
appellate court to correct errors as may be found in
the appealed judgment. Thus, appellant could not
have been placed twice in jeopardy when the CA
modified the ruling of the RTC by finding him guilty
of robbery with homicide as charged in the
Information instead of murder. (People v. Torres, 24
September 2014).

522

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

Q.

The rule under double jeopardy is that the
conviction of the accused shall bar another
prosecution for an offense which necessarily
includes the offense charged in the former
complaint or information under which he was
convicted. What is the exception to this rule
wherein the accused may later on be charged
for the graver offense which necessarily
includes the former offense charged?

A.

The exception to this rule wherein the accused may
later on be charged for the graver offense which
necessarily includes the former offense charged
are: (SuCK)
(a) The graver offense developed due to supervening
facts arising from the same act or omission
constituting the former charge. Supervening facts
are those which arose after plea.
(b)

The facts constituting the graver charge,
became known or were discovered only after a
plea was entered in the former complaint or
information. Here the facts occurred before
plea but became known or were discovered
only after plea.

(c)

The plea of guilty to the lesser offense was
made without the consent of the prosecutor
and the offended party. However where the
offended party failed to appear in the
arraignment despite due notice, his consent to
the guilty plea is not required.

In any of the foregoing cases, where the
accused satisfies or serves in whole or in part the
judgment, he shall be credited with the same in the
event of conviction for the graver offense. (S? R 117).

523

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

The accused pleaded guilty to the charge of less
serious physical injuries and was accordingly
convicted by the trial court. Subsequently the
prosecutor filed an information for frustrated
murder against the accused based on the same
incident which gave rise to the charge of less
serious physical injuries. The accused filed a
motion to quash the information on the ground of
double jeopardy. The prosecutor argued that the
fact of the accused's intent to kill was discovered
by the prosecution and the complainantonly after
the accused had beenconvicted.
a) Should the motion to quash be granted?
b) Suppose the intent to kill was indicated in the
affidavits of the witnesses for the complainant
which were the basis for the filing of the
complaint,would your conclusion be different?

A.

a) No, the motion to quash should not be granted.
Under S?(b) R117, the conviction of the accused
shall not be a bar to another prosecution for an
offense which necessarily includes the offense
charged in the former complaint or information if the
facts constituting the graver charge became known or
were discovered only after a plea was entered in the
former complaint or information.
Here the intent to kill was discovered by the
prosecutor and the complainant only after the
accused had been convicted. Hence the accused's
conviction for less serious physical injuries would
not constitute double jeopardy.

524

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

b) Yes, my conclusion would be different. In that
case the motion to quash on the ground of
double jeopardy should be granted.
Since the fact of the accused having an intent
to kill was known to the complainant and to the
prosecution before plea, the same would not fall
under the exception to the double jeopardy rule
under S7(a) or (b) R117. Hence the filing of the
second information for frustrated murder would
place the accused in double jeopardy since such
charge for frustrated murder necessarily includes
the earlier charge of les~ serious physical injuries.
Q.

For the multiple stab wounds sustained by the
victim, Noel was charged with frustrated
homicide in the Regional Trial Court. Upon
arraignment, he entered a plea of guilty to said
crime. Neither the court nor the prosecution
was aware that the victim had died two days
earlier on account of his stab wounds.
Because of his guilty plea, Noel was
convicted of frustrated homicide and meted the
corresponding penalty. When the prosecution
learned of the victim's death, it filed within
fifteen days therefrom a motion to amend the
Informationto upgradethe chargefrom frustrated
homicide to consummated homicide. Noel
opposedthe motion claiming that the admission
of the amended information would place him in
double jeopardy. Resolve the motion with
reasons.(05 Bar Q15).

A.

The motion to amend the information from
frustrated homicide to consummated homicide
should be granted.

525

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
conviction of the accused shall not be a bar to
another
prosecution
for an offense which
necessarily includes the offense charged in the
former information if the facts constituting the
graver charge became known or were discovered
only after the filing of the former information.
Here the fact constituting the graver charge of
consummated homicide, that is, the death of
the victim became known to the prosecution only
after the filing of the former information for
frustrated homicide.
Hence Noel's conviction for frustrated homicide
shall not be a bar to another prosecution for
consummated homicide. 85
Extinction of the criminal action or liability
Q.

X was charged before the MTC of the crime of
grave oral defamation. After trial, X was
convicted of the lesser crime of simple slander.
At the time the information for grave oral
defamation was filed, the crime of simple
slander had already prescribed. May X move to
set aside the judgment of conviction?

A.

Yes. Where an accused has been found to have
committed a lesser offense included in the offense
charged, he cannot be convicted of the lesser offense
if it had already prescribed. To hold otherwise would
85As

a matter of strict procedure, the motion to amend the information from
frustrated homicide to consummated homicide was imprecise since the accused
Noel had already been convicted and should in fact serve the sentence forthwith.
The prosecution should simply file a new information for consummated homicide.
The service of the sentence should be credited to Noel if he is convicted of the
consummated homicide charge. The examinee should refrain from discussing
this matter though since it is not the issue posed by the question.

526

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

be to sanction the circumvention of the law on
prescription by the simple expedient of accusing
defendant of the graver offense. (See Francisco v.
Court of Appeals, 122 SCRA 538 [1983]).
Q.

The accused filed a motion to quash on the
ground that the information did not state the
date of the commission of the offense and
hence did not conform substantiallyto the
prescribed form. Should the court grant the
motion to quash?

A.

No. If the motion to quash is based on an alleged
defect of the complaint or information which can be
cured by amendment, the court shall order that an
amendment be made. (S4 R117).
Here the defect of the information can be
easily cured by an amendment by specifying the
specific date or if not possible a date as near
as possible to the actual date of the commission.
(S11 R110).

Q.

What is a provisional dismissal?

A.

A provisional dismissal is an order dismissing a
case provisionally, that is, a dismissal without
prejudice to the revival of the case within the oneyear or two-year period provided for in SS R117.
Since the dismissal is only provisional, it requires
the express consent of the accused. The grounds
for a provisional dismissal are not set forth in SS
R 117, but it is generally understood as any ground
other than those for a motion to quash under S3
R117. A common ground is difficulty in presenting
prosecution witnesses in court. The accused, where
appropriate, may move to dismiss the information

527

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the ground of denial of his right to a speedy trial
(S9 R119) or he may expressly consent to a
provisional dismissal.
Q.

State the rule on provisional dismissal.

A.

A case shall not be provisionally dismissed except
with the express consent of the accused and with
notice to the offended party.
The provisional dismissal of offenses punishable
by imprisonment not exceeding 6 years and/or a fine
of any amount shall become automaticall/36
permanent 1 year after issuance of the order without
the case having been revived. With respect to
offenses punishable by imprisonment of more than 6
years, their provisional dismissal shall become
permanent automatically 2 years after issuance of the
order without the case having been revived.

Q.

Pedro was charged with the violation of Section
261(q)of the Omnibus Election Codefor violating
the election gun ban, i.e., for carrying a firearm
outside of his residence or place of business
without any authority from the Comelec. Pedro
filed a motion to quash on the ground that the
inforn,ation contains averments which if true
would constitute a legal excuse or justification
and on the ground that the facts charged do not
constitute an offense. Pedro attached to his
motion a purported Comeleccertification that he
is exempt from the gun-ban. The RTC quashed
the information. More than a year after the
prosecution's receipt of the order quashing the
information,the prosecutionmovedto reopenthe
case on the ground that the certificationsubmitted
86

See also Sec. 14, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014.

528

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

by Pedro was spurious. The RTC granted the
motion. Pedro moved for the reconsiderationof
the order arguing that under SS R117, the
dismissal becamepermanentpursuantto the timebar rule. Is Pedro'scontentioncorrect?
A.

No. A dismissal based on a motion to quash under
the grounds set forth in 83 R117 is not governed by
the time-bar rule under 88 R 117 but by 86 R 117
which provides that an order sustaining the motion
to quash is not a bar to another prosecution for the
same offense unless the motion was based on the
ground that the criminal action or liability has been
extinguished or on the ground of double jeopardy.
(ED) The failure of the Rules to state under Section
6 that a Section 8 provisional dismissal is a bar to
further prosecution shows that the framers did not
intend a dismissal based on a motion to quash and
a provisional dismissal to be confused with one
another; Section 8 operates in a world of its own
separate from motion to quash, and merely
provides a time-bar that uniquely applies to
dismissals other than those grounded on Section 3:
Conversely, when a dismissal is pursuant to a
motion to quash under Section 3, Section 8 and its
time-bar does not apply. (Los Banos v. San Pedro,
G.R. No. 173588, 22 April 2009, [e.b.] Brion, J.).

Q.

Respondent New Prosperity Plastic Products,
represented by Elizabeth Uy, is the private
complainant in Criminal Cases for Violation of
B.P. Big. 22 filed against petitioner William Co,
which were raffled to the MeTC of Caloocan
City. In the absence of Uy and the private
counsel, the cases were provisionally dismissed
on 9 June 2003 in open court upon motion of
the accused pursuant to SS R117.Uy received a

529

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

copy of the 9 June 2003 Order on 2 July 2003,
while her counsel of record received a copy a
day after (3 July). On 2 July 2004, Uy, through
counsel, filed a Motion to Revive the Criminal
Cases.The accused opposed the motion on the
ground that the provisional dismissal had
become permanent since more than one year
had lapsed from the issuance of the order of
provisional dismissal. The accused also argued
that both the motion to revive and the court
order of revival must be made within the
one-yearperiod.
a)

Maythe criminal cases be revived?

b) Would your answerbe the sameif the private
counsel received the order of provisional
dismissal also on 2 July 2003, taking into
accountthat 2004is a leapyear?
A.
a) Yes. Although SB R117 states that the order of
dismissal shall become permanent one year
after the issuance thereof without the case
having been revived, the provision should be
construed to mean that the order of dismissal
shall become permanent one year after service
of the order of dismissal on the public
prosecutor who has control of the prosecution
without the criminal case having been revived. If
the offended party is represented by a private
counsel the better rule is that the reckoning
period should commence to run from the time
such private counsel was actually notified of the
order of provisional dismissal. When a party is
530

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

represented by a counsel, notices of all kinds
emanating from the court should be sent to the
latter at his/her given address.
Here the order of provisional dismissal was
received by the private counsel on 3 July 2003.
Hence the motion to revive filed on 2 July 2004 was
filed within the one year period.
The contention that both the filing of the motion
to revive the case and the court order reviving it
must be made prior to the expiration of the oneyear period is unsustainable. Such interpretation is
not found in the Rules. Moreover, to permit
otherwise would definitely put the offended party at
the mercy of the trial court, which may wittingly or
unwittingly not comply. Judicial notice must be
taken of the fact that most, if not all, of our trial
court judges have to deal with clogged dockets in
addition to their administrative duties and functions.
b)

Yes. Under the Administrative Code of 1987, a
year is composed of 12 calendar months.
Hence the fact that February 2004 had 29 days
is irrelevant since the law speaks of calendar
months.
Hence a motion to revive filed on 2
July 2004 was within 12 calendar months from 2
July 2003. ( Co v. New Prosperity Plastic
Products, Inc., 30 June 2014).

Q.

How is a criminal case revived after a provisional
dismissal?

A.

By the filing of a motion to revive and the issuance
of an order of revival. The motion to revive must be
filed within the one-year or two-year period but the
order of revival may be issued thereafter. (Id.). After
531

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the issuance of the order of revival, the case
essentially continues from where it left off. 87
Q.

Petitioner was charged with selling and
possessing dangerous drugs in violation of the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act. However
the prosecution'sprincipal witness, the arresting
officer P02 Villas, failed to attend two hearings
promptingthe court to provisionallydismissthe
case with the express consent of the Petitioner
during the 16 May 2013 hearing. On 5 June 2013,
P02 Villas filed a Motion to Revive the Case
against petitioner. P02 Villas explained that his
failure to appear duringthe hearings of the cases
was due to the untimely death of his father-in-law.
The court granted the motion to revive. On
petition for certiorari, the Petitioner argues that
the judge acted with grave abuse of discretionin
revivingthe case since it was not the prosecutor
who filed it but rather the arrestingofficer. Is the
Petitioner'sargument correct?

A.

In the case at bar, it must be noted that the accused
is charged with a public crime, hence, it is a victimless crime. Unlike in private crimes where the
participation of the private offended party is
generally required for the recovery of civil liability, in
the instant case, there is no particular private
offended party who can actually file the motion to
revive. Hence, in some instances, as in this case, it
is the arresting officer, P02 Villas, who filed the
motion to revive the case out of his sense of duty

871n
People v. Lacson, 400 SCRA 267 (2003) it was stated that that "[t]he
case may be revived by the State within the time-bar either by the refiling of the
Information or by the filing of a new Information for the same offense or an
offense necessarily included therein." It is opined that the better rule is that an
order of revival would suffice, as is the practice before the courts.

532

J9JC9B0M

Rule 117
Motion To Quash

as a police officer and compelled by his sense of
obligation considering that he knew his absence
was the cause why the complaint was provisionally
dismissed. (Saldariega v. Panganiban, 15 April
2015, Peralta, J.).
Q.

What is the remedy of the accused if the
criminal case is refiled after the provisional
dismissal has become permanent?

A.

The accused may file a motion to quash on the
ground of double jeopardy. The reason is that the
permanent
dismissal
shall
amount
to
an
adjudication of the case on the merits. (See Sec.
14, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014).

Q.

Distinguish a motion to quash
provisional dismissal under 58 R117.

from

a

MOTION TO QUASH

PROVISIONAL DISMISSAL

Includes permanent
dismissal, e.g., double
jeopardy & extinction of
criminal liability or action.

Essentially refers to dismissal
temporary in character.

Grounds are specified under
S3 R117.

S8 R 117 does not state the
qrounds therefor.

Consequences of quashal
governed by S4- 7 R 117.

Consequences of dismissal
coverned by S8 R 117.

At the instance of accused.

At the instance of either the
prosecution or accused or of
both.

Form and contents governed
by S2 R117.

S2 R 117 not applicable.

Grounded on defects or
defenses apparent on the

May be grounded on reasons
other than defects found in

533

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

face of the information or
complaint.

the information or complaint.

Filed before arraignment.

May be allowed after
arraignment and even during
trial.

Does not per se carry any
connotation of
impermanence.

Impermanent until time-bar
rule applies.

(Los Banos v. San Pedro, G.R. No. 173588, 22 April
2009, [e.b.] Brion, J.).

Q.

What is the effect of the accused's failure to
assert any ground of a motion to quash before
plea, either because he did not file a motion to
quash or because he failed to allege such
ground in the motion to quash he had filed?

A.

Such failure shall be deemed a waiver of the
grounds of the motion to quash not so asserted.
The exceptions would be the following grounds:

(JEN DO)
1) Lack of jurisdiction over the offense charged.

2) Extinction of the criminal action or liability.
3) Facts charged in the complaint or information do
not constitute an offense.
4) Double jeopardy.
5) The officer who filed the information had no
authority to do so. (S9 R117; Cudia v. Court of
Appeals, 284 SCRA 173).
In any of the foregoing cases, the motion to
quash may be filed even after plea.

534

J9JC9B0M

RULE 118. PRE-TRIAL
Q.

Is pre-trial mandatory in criminal cases?

A.

Yes pre-trial is mandatory in all criminal cases
cognizable by the Sandiganbayan, MTC, and
RTC. (MRS)

Q.

What matters shall be considered during the
pre-trial?

A.

The court shall order a pre-trial conference to
consider the following matters: (PMS WTO)
(a) Plea bargaining.
(b) Stipulation of facts.
(c) Marking for identification of evidence of the
parties.
(d) Waiver of objectionsto admissibilityof evidence.
(e) Modification of the order of trial if the accused
admits the charge but interposes a lawful
defense.
(f) Such (other) matters as will promote a fair and
expeditious trial (fet) of the criminal and civil
aspects of the case. (S1 R118).

Q.

What is plea bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the
prosecutor in a criminal case work out a mutually
satisfactory disposition of the case subject to court
approval. It usually involves the defendant's
pleading guilty to a lesser offense or to only one or
some of the counts of a multi-count indictment in
535

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

return for a lighter sentence than that for the graver
charge. (Black's Law Dictionary,s" ed., 1979).
Q. What is the requirement for agreements and
admissions made or entered during the pre-trial
conference?
A.

All agreements or admissions made or entered
during the pre-trial conference shall be reduced in
writing and signed by the accused and counsel;
otherwise they cannot be used against the
accused. The agreements covering the matters
referred to in S 1 R 118 shall be approved by the
court. (S2 R118).

Q.

During the pre-trial, Bembol personally offered
to settle the case for P1 Million to the private
prosecutor, who immediately put the offer on
record in the presence of the trial judge. Is
Bembol's offer a judicialadmission of his guilt?
(08 Bar Q8b)

A.

No. Under S2 R118, all agreements or admissions
made or entered during the pre-trial conference
shall be reduced in writing and signed by the
accused and counsel; otherwise they cannot be
used against the accused.
Here Bembol's offer was merely oral. Hence
the same cannot be used against him.

Q. What is the consequenceof the non-appearance
of counselat the pre-trialconference?
A.

If the counsel for the accused or the prosecutor
does not appear at the pre-trial conference and
does not offer an acceptable excuse for his lack of
cooperation, the court may impose proper
536

J9JC9B0M

Rule 118
Pre-Trial

sanctions or penalties. (S3 R118). The court may
cite counsel for contempt or impose fines upon him.
Q.

When shall the court issue a pre-trial order?
What the contents and the effects of the pretrial order?

A.

After the pre-trial conference, the court shall issue
an order reciting the actions taken, the facts
stipulated, and evidence marked (FEA).
Such order shall bind the parties, limit the trial
to matters not disposed of, and control the course
of action during the trial (BLC), unless modified by
the court to prevent manifest injustice. (S4 R118).

Q.

What criminal cases shall be referred to
mediation on the civil liabilitythereof?

A.

(a) The following cases shall be referred to
mediation on the civil liability unless a
settlement is reached earlier in the pretrial/preliminaryconference:
i) Crimes where payment may prevent criminal
prosecution or may extinguish criminal liability,
such as violations of:
a) B.P. Big. 22;
b) SSS Law (R.A. No. 1161, as amended by
R.A. No. 8282); and
c) PAG-IBIG Law (R.A. No. 9679).
ii) Crimes against property under Title 10 of the
Revised Penal Code (RPC), where the
obligation may be civil in nature, such as:
537

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a) Theft under Art. 308, RPC, cognizable by
the first level courts;
b) Estafa under Art. 315( 1 ), RPC, except
estafa under Art. 315 (2) and (3);
c) Others forms of swindling under Art. 316,
RPC;
d) Swindling of a minor under Art. 317, RPC;
d) Other deceits under Art. 318, RPC; and
e) Malicious mischief under Art. 327, RPC.
iii) Crimes against honor under Title 13, RPC,
where the liability may be civil in nature,
such as:
a) Libel by means of writings or similar means
under Art. 355, RPC;
b) Threatening to publish and offer to present
such publication for a compensation under
Art. 356, RPC;
c) Prohibited publication of acts referred to in
the course of official proceedings under Art.
357, RPC;
d) Grave Slander (Grave Oral Defamation) of serious and insulting nature under Art.
358, par. 1, RPC;
e) Simple Slander (Oral Defamation) - not of
a serious and insulting nature under Art.
358, par.2, RPC~
f) Grave Slander by Deed - of a serious
nature under Art. 359, par. 1 RPC;

538

J9JC9B0M

Rule 118
Pre-Trial

g) Simple Slander by Deed - not of a serious
nature Art. 359, par. 2, RPC;
h)

Incriminating innocent person under Art.
363, RPC;

i) Intriguing against honor under Art. 364,
RPC;
iv) Libel under R.A. 10175 (Cybercrime
Prevention Act of 2012) where the liability
may be civil in nature;
v) Criminal negligence under Title 14, RPC,
where the liability may be civil in nature; and
vi) Intellectual property rights cases where the
liability may be civil in nature.
Q.

When shall criminal cases be referred to the
Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit?

A.

The referral of the case for mediation to the
Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit shall be
made only after the conduct of the arraignment and
the pre-trial/preliminaryconference. The court shall
serve the Order of Referral to the PMC Unit
immediately after the arraignment and the pretrial/preliminary conference. (Revised Guidelines for
Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

Q.

When shall the mediation be terminated?

A.

The Mediation shall be terminated within a nonextendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from
the date of referral by the court to the PMC Unit.
After the lapse of the mediation period or if
mediation fails, trial shall proceed. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
539

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Shall cases subject to the Rule on Summary
Procedure be referred to mediation?

A.

No. Except those cases mentioned previously,
criminal cases subject to the Rule on Summary
Procedure shall not be referred to mediation.
(Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases).

Q.

May criminal cases for violation of the VOWCHI
(R.A. No. 9262) be referred to mediation?

A.

No. (OCA Circular No. 51-2011).

540

J9JC9B0M

RULE 119. TRIAL
Q.

What are the instances when the accused's
presence is required under the Rules?

A.

The instances when the accused's presence is
required by the Rules are the following: (APIP)
(a) During the arraignment.
(b) During the pre-trial conference, when required
by the court. (MANGONTAWAR M. GUBAT,
THE REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDUREANNO. 370-71 [3rd ed., 2009]).
(c) During the trial, when required by the court for
purposes of identification.
(d) During the promulgation of the judgment,
unless it is for a light offense in which case the
accusedmay appearby counselor representative.
At such stages of the proceedings, the
accused's presence is required and cannot be
waived. (People v. De Grano, 5 June 2009).

Q.

What are the requisites of a motion to postpone
trial for absence of evidence?

A.

A motion to postpone a trial on the ground of
absence of evidence can be granted only upon
affidavit showing the materiality or relevancy of
such evidence, and that due diligence has been
used to procure it. But if the adverse party admits
the facts to be given in evidence, even if he objects
or reserves the right to object to their admissibility,
the trial shall not be postponed. (S3 R30).
541

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is trial in absentia?

A.

The trial of a criminal case which proceeds
notwithstanding the absence of the accused
provided that the accused was arraigned, duly
notified of the hearing or trial, and his failure to
appear thereat is unjustifiable. (ANU) (Sec. 14[2],
Art. 111, Constitution).

Q.

After the accused had been arraigned, he failed
to appear during the trial despite notice. The
judge ordered that the case be archived. Was
the order proper?

A.

No. The judge cannot archive case if accused had
been arraigned. Trial in absentia should be
conducted. (Visbal v. Judge Vanilla, 7 April 2009).

Q.

What is the time limit within which the accused
must be brought to trial?

A.

The trial shall commence within 30 days from
receipt of the pre-trial order. (S1 R119).88

Q.

What is the remedy where the accused is not
brought to trial within the time limit?

A.

The information may be dismissed on motion of the
accused on the ground of denial of his right to
speedy trial. Failure of the accused to move for
dismissal prior to trial shall constitute a waiver of
such right to dismiss. (89 R119).

Q.

Give the time limits to be observed in the
prosecution of a case against a detained accused.

8

8This time limit was modified by Sec. 8 of A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC,

1 May 2014.

542

effective

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

A.

It shall be the duty of the trial court, the public or
private prosecutor, and the defense counsel to
ensure, subject to the excluded delays specified in
R119 and the Speedy Trial Act of 1998, compliance
with the following time limits in the prosecution of
the case against a detained accused:
(a) The case of the accused shall be raffled and
referred to the trial court to which it is assigned
within three days from the filing of the
information;
(b) The court shall arraign the accused within 10
days from the date of the raffle;
(c) The court shall hold the pre-trial conference
within 30 days after arraignment or within 10
days if the accused is under preventive
detention; provided, however, that where the
direct testimonies of the witnesses are to be
presented through judicial affidavits, the court
shall give the prosecution not more than 20
days from arraignment within which to prepare
and submit their judicial affidavits in time for
the pre-trial conference;
(d) After the pre-trial conference, the court shall
set the trial of the case in the pre-trial order not
later than 30 days from the termination of the
pre-trial conference; and
(e) The court shall terminate the regular trial
within 180 days, or the trial by judicial affidavits
within 60 days, reckoned from the date trial
begins, minus the excluded delays or
postponements specified in R 119 and the
Speedy Trial Act of 1998. (Section 8, A.M.
No.12-11-2-SC,effective 1 May 2014).
543

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the remedy of a detained accused if the
above time limits are not observed?

A.

The case against the detained accused may be
dismissed on ground of denial of the right to speedy
trial in the event of failure to observe the above
time limits. (Sec. 9, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1
May 2014).

Q.

Give the rules on provisional dismissal due to
absence of an essential witness in cases
involving a detained accused.

A.
(a)

When the delays are due to the absence of an
essential witness whose whereabouts are
unknown or cannot be determined and,
therefore, are subject to exclusion in determining
compliance with the prescribed time limits which
caused the trial to exceed 180 days, the court
shall provisionally dismiss the action with the
express consent of the detained accused.

(b)

When the delays are due to the absence of an
essential witness whose presence cannot be
obtained by due diligence though his
whereabouts are known, the court shall
provisionally dismiss the action with the
express consent of the detained accused
provided: ( 1) the hearing in the case has been
previously twice postponed due to the nonappearance of the essential witness and both
the witness and the offended party, if they are
two different persons, have been given notice
of the setting of the case for third hearing,
which notice contains a warning that the case
would be dismissed if the essential witness

544

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial
continues to be absent; and (2) there is proof
of service of the pertinent notices of hearings
or subpoenas upon the essential witness and
the offended party at their last known postal or
e-mail addresses or mobile phone numbers.
(c)

For the above purpose, the public or private
prosecutor shall first present during the trial the
essential witness or witnesses to the case
before anyone else. An essential witness is
one whose testimony dwells on the presence
of some or all of the elements of the crime and
whose testimony is indispensable to the
conviction of the accused. (Sec. 10, A.M. No.
12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014).

Q.

From when is the 1-year or 2-year for reviving a
provisionally dismissed criminal case under 58
R117 reckoned? What is the result if the case is
not revived within the required period?

A.

The one or two-year period allowed for reviving a
criminal case that has been provisionally dismissed
shall be reckoned from the issuance of the order of
dismissal." The dismissal shall become automatically
permanent if the case is not revived within the
required period. Such permanent dismissal shall
amount to an adjudication of the case on the merits.
(Sec. 14, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014).

Q.

Accused was charged with rape and detained.
The private complainant filed a petition for
transfer of venue. Pretrial was conducted and
terminated. On the date set for the trial, the

89The
ruling in Co v. New Prosperity Plastic Products, 30 June 2014, that
the one or two-year period is reckoned from the notice of the order of dismissal
by the public prosecutor, or the private counsel if the offended party is
represented by one, is applicable mutetis mutandis.

545

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

prosecution filed a motion for continuanceciting
the pendencyof the petition for transfer of venue.
The accused filed a motion to dismiss the case
on the ground of the violation of his right to a
speedy trial invoking 51 R119which providesthat
trial shall be conducted within 30 days from
receipt of the pretrial order. The prosecution
argued that the time during which the petition for
transfer of venue was pending should be
excluded from the 30-day period citing S3(a)(5)
R119. The trial court dismissed the case and the
prosecution brought the matter up to the SC by
way of certiorari under R65.Did the trial court act
properly in dismissing the case?
A.

Yes. A careful reading of S3(a)(5) R119 would show
that the only delays that may be excluded from the
time limit within which trial must commence are
those resulting from proceedings concerning the
accused. The time involved in the proceedings in a
petition for transfer of venue can only be excluded
from said time limit if it was the accused who
instituted the same.
Here, in this case, the time during which the
petition for transfer of venue filed by the private
complainant is pending, cannot be excluded from
the time limit of thirty (30) days from receipt of the
pre-trial order for the trial to commence imposed in
81 R119. Hence the trial court acted properly in
dismissing the case. (Mari v. Gonzalez, 12
September 2011 ).

Q.

Who has the burden of proof in the motion to
dismiss on ground of denialof right to speedytrial?

546

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial
A.

The accused shall have the burden of proving the
motion but the prosecution shall have the burden of
going forward with the evidence to establish the
exclusion of time under S3 R119.

Q.

Will the dismissal on ground of denial of right to
speedy trial give rise to double jeopardy?

A.

Yes. Dismissal for denial of the right to a speedy
trial is a dismissal on the merits and amounts to an
acquittal. (Salcedo v. Mendoza, 88 SCRA 811;
Esmena v. Pogoy, 102 SCRA 861 ).
S9 R119 provides that the dismissal shall be
subject to the rules on double jeopardy. Hence
provided that the requisites of double jeopardy
under S7 R117 are met, the dismissal would
amount to an acquittal. The judge's decision on
whether there was a violation of the right to a
speedy trial is of course subject to review by the
special civil action for certiorari if made with grave
abuse of discretion amounting to lack of or excess
of jurisdiction.

Q.

What are the grounds under which a witness for
the accused may be conditionally examined
before trial? What must be set forth in the
motion for conditional examination of witness?

A.

The grounds under which a witness for the accused
may be conditionally examined before trial
are: (SIOS)
1) The witness is sick or infirm as to afford
reasonable ground for believing that he will not
be able to attend the trial; or

547

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

2) The witness resides more than one hundred
(100) kilometers from the place of trial and has
no means to attend the same; or
3) Other similar circumstances exist that would
make him unavailable or prevent him from
attending the trial.
The accused shall file a motion for conditional
examination with notice to the other parties and the
motion shall state the name and residence of the
witness, the substance of his testimony, and the
ground for his unavailability. (812 R119).
Q.

How is the conditionalexamination of a witness
for the accused made?

A.

The court shall issue an order directing that the
witness be examined at a specific date, time, and
place and that a cop of the order be served on the
prosecutor at least 3 days before the scheduled
examination. The examination shall be taken before
a judge, or, if not practicable, a member of the
Bar in good standing so designated by the judge in
the order, or if the order be made by a court of
superior jurisdiction, before an inferior court to be
designated therein (JIB). The examination shall
proceed notwithstanding the absence of the
prosecutor provided he was duly notified of the
hearing. (813 R119).

Q.

What are the grounds for conditional examination
of witness for the prosecution? How is the
examination made?

A.

The grounds for conditional examination
witness for the prosecution are: (SIL)

548

of a

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

1) The witness is too sick or infirm to appear at the
trial as directed by the court; or
2) The witness has to leave the Philippines with no
definite date of returning.
The examination shall be made before the court
where the case ls pending and shall be made in the
presence of the accused or in his absence after
reasonable notice to attend the examination has been
served on him. The examination shall be conducted
in the same manner as an examination at the trial.
The statement taken may be admitted in behalf of or
against the accused. Failure or refusal of the accused
to attend the examination after notice shall be
considered a waiver. (815 R119).
Q.

Raul Rodrigo was charged with robbery with
homicide before the RegionalTrial Court of Rizal.
After presenting 3 witnesses, the prosecution
could no longer proceed since its 2 most
instrumentalwitnesses,AB and CD,are now both
permanently residing in the United States. The
prosecutor then moved to have their depositions
taken by way of written interrogatories. Their
depositions having been taken although without
the participation of accused Raul Rodrigo, the
prosecutor now seeks to introduce the same
contending that without its admission, there will
be a failure of justice since at its present stage,
there is not even a prima facie case against
Rodrigo. Over the vigorous objection of the
defense,the trial court admitted said depositions.
Rodrigo was convicted and thereafter sentenced
to reclusion perpetua.

549

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Discuss with reasons the tenability of the
trial court's ruling on the admission of said
depositions. (85 Bar Q10).

A.

The trial court's ruling on the admission of the
depositions is untenable. Under 815 R119 the
conditional examination of the witnesses for the
prosecution should be done before the court where
the case is pending.
Here the deposition or examination was not
done in the RTC of Rizal but in fact in the United
States without any opportunity on the part of
Rodrigo to cross-examine AB and CD. Hence their
depositions are inadmissible in evidence for being
violative of 815 R119 and for being hearsay.

Q.

Petitioners were charged with the MeTC for Other
Deceits under Art. 318 of the Revised Penal Code.
The prosecution's complaining witness was Li
Luen Ping, a frail, old businessman from Cambodia.
The private prosecutor filed with the MeTC a
motion to take oral deposition of Li before the
Philippine consular official in Cambodia, alleging
that Li was being treated for lung infection in
Cambodia and upon doctor's advice, he could not
make the long travel to the Philippines by reason
of ill health. Notwithstanding the Petitioners'
objections, the MeTC granted the motion. Did the
MeTC act correctly in granting the motion to take
oral deposition?

A.

No. The procedure under Rule 23 to 28 of the Rules
of Court allows the taking of depositions in civil
cases, either upon oral examination or written
interrogatories, before any judge, notary public or
person authorizedto administeroaths at any time or
550

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

place within the Philippines; or before any Philippine
consular official, commissioned officer or person
authorized to administer oaths in a foreign state or
country, with no additional requirement except
reasonable notice in writing to the other party.
But for purposes of taking the deposition in
criminal cases, more particularly of a prosecution
witness who would forseeably be unavailable for
trial, the testimonial examination should be made
before the court, or at least before the judge, where
the case is pending as required by the clear
mandate of 815 R119. To do otherwise would
violate the accused's right to confront the witnesses
against him. (Gov. People, 18 July 2012).
Q.

Describe the procedure wherein an accused or
accused may be discharged to be a state witness.

A.

When two or more persons are jointly charged with
the commission of any offense, upon motion of the
prosecution before resting its case, the court may
direct one or more of the accused to be discharged
with their consent so that they may be state
witnesses. (817 R119).

Q.

What are the requisites for the discharge of an
accused to be a state witness?

A.

There shall be a hearing in support of the discharge
where the prosecution shall present evidence and
the sworn statement of each proposed state
witness to prove that: (CNN CG)
(a) There is absolute necessity for the testimony of
the accused whose discharge is requested;

551

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

(b)

There is no other direct evidence available for
the proper prosecution of the offense committed,
except the testimony of said accused;

(c)

The testimony of said accused can be
substantially corroborated in its material points;

(d)

Said accused does not appear to be the most
9..!dfily;and

( e)

Said accused has not at any time been
convicted of any offense involving moral
turpitude. (S17 R119).

Louise is being charged with the frustrated
murder of Roy. The prosecution's lone witness,
Mariter, testified to having seen Louise prepare
the poison which she later surreptitiously
poured into Roy's wine glass. Louise sought
the disqualification of Mariter as witness on
account of her previous conviction for perjury.
1) xxx

2) Can Mariterbe utilizedas statewitness if she is
a co-accusedin the criminal case?(94 BarQ10).
A.

2) No, Mariter cannot be utilized as state witness.
Under S17 R119 it is required that the accused
who is sought to be discharged as a state witness
has not at any time been convicted of any offense
involving moral turpitude.
Perjury is an offense involving moral turpitude.
Hence Mariter cannot be utilized as a state witness.

552

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

Q.

May the court consider the evidence adduced in
support of the discharge?

A.

Yes since such evidence shall automatically form
part of the trial. However if the court denies the
motion for discharge of the accused as a state
witness, his sworn statement shall be inadmissible
in evidence. (S17 R119).

Q.

In January 2011, Venson Evangelista, a car
salesman, was abducted by the brothers Roger
and Raymond Dominguez,Jayson Miranda, and
Alfred Mendiola. His charred remains were later
discovered. An information for carnapping with
homicide was subsequently filed with the RTC of
Quezon City against the Dominguez brothers,
Miranda, and Mendiola. Before the trial, the
prosecution filed a motion to discharge Mendiola
as a state witness. In the hearing on the motion
to discharge, Mendiola testified in graphic detail
regardingthe crime. He testified that he drove the
carnapped vehicle and that the actual killing of
Evangelista was done by the Dominguez
brothers. Mendiola was cross-examined by the
defense counsel who manifestedthat the crossexamination was only for the limited purpose of
the discharge hearing and that he was reserving
his right for a more extensive cross-examination
during the trial. The motion to discharge was
granted by the trial court. However in a surprise
turn of events, Mendiola was found dead before
he could testify during the trial. May Mendiola's
testimony during the discharge hearing be
introduced in evidenceagainst the accused?

A.

Yes. S 17 R 119 is explicit that the testimony of the
witness during the discharge proceeding will only
553

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

be inadmissible if the court denies the motion to
discharge the accused as a state witness.
However, the hearing in this case had already
concluded and the motion for discharge, approved.
Thus, whatever transpired during the hearing is
already automatically deemed part of the records of
the criminal case and admissible in evidence
pursuant to the rule.
That the testimony of Mendiola was offered for
the limited purpose of qualifying him as a state
witness does not automatically
render his
statements as to the specifics on the commission of
the offense inadmissible. To recall, one of the
requirements under S 17 R 119 is to establish that
the erstwhile respondent does not appear to be the
most guilty among him and his cohorts. Thus, it is
quite understandable that, during the discharge
proceeding, Mendiola narrated in graphic detail his
entire knowledge of the crime and the extent of the
participation of each of the accused. (People v.
Dominguez, 19 February 2018, Velasco, J.).
Q.

What is the effect if the accused is discharged
to be a state witness?

A.

The order discharging an accused to be a state
witness shall amount to an acquittal and shall bar
future prosecution for the same offense.
Exception: Unless the accused fails or refuses
to testify against his co-accused in accordance with
his sworn statement constituting the basis for his
discharge. (S 18 R 119 ). But where the failure to
testify is not imputable to the accused but to the
prosecution, as where the prosecution did not
present him as a witness, the accused is deemed
554

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial
to have complied with his undertaking for his
discharge. (People v. Mendiola, 82 Phil. 740).
Q.

X was charged and tried before the RTC with
qualified theft. However, after the trial and
before judgment, it became clear that the crime
committed by X was not qualified theft but
estafa through misappropriation, since the
evidence showed that he had juridicalpossession
of the goods subject of the charge.
a) May X be convicted of estafa?
b) Assuming that X could not be convicted of
estafa, what procedural step would you take
if you were the prosecutor?

A.
a)

No, X may not be convicted of estafa.

It is axiomatic that an accused may be convicted
only of the offense charged or of an offense
necessarily included in the offense charged. (S4
R120). The crime of estafa is not necessarily
included in qualified theft. Hence X may not be
convicted of the same.
b)

If I were the prosecutor, the procedural step I
would take is to move for the substitution of the
information with a new one for estafa. X would
not be placed in double jeopardy since estafa is
a different offense from qualified theft.

The court shall commit X to answer for the
proper offense and dismiss the original information
for qualified theft upon the filing of a new
information charging the proper offense of estafa
through misappropriation. The court may require

555

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the witnesses to give bail for their appearance at
the trial. (S14 R110; S19 R119).

Q. The accused pleadednot guilty to the charge of
less serious physical injuries. Beforejudgment,
the fiscal moved that he be allowed to file a new
information against the accused for the graver
crime of frustrated murder it appearing that the
injuries were inflicted with intent to kill. The
defense objected upon the ground that the
charge for less serious physical injuries is
included in the offense of frustrated murder and
since he had already pleaded to the lesser
charge, the filing of a new information would
constitute second jeopardy. The prosecution
replied that there would be no double jeopardy
as the complaint will be dismissed upon the
filing of the information for frustrated murder,
pursuant to 511 R11990 of the 1985 Rules on
Criminal Procedure relevant to situations when
mistake has been made in charging the proper
offense. The fiscal argued that the fact of the
accused's intent to kill was discovered by the
prosecution and the complainant only during
the trial of the case.
a)

Resolvethe motion. Reasons.

b) Suppose the intent to kill is indicated in the
affidavits of the witnesses for the
complainant which were the basis for the
filing of the complaint,would your resolution
be defferent and if so, why? (87 Bar Q11 ).

90NowS19

R119.

556

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial
A.
a) The fiscal's motion for substitution of information
should be granted.
Under 814 R110 on substitution, if it appears
at any time before judgment that a mistake has
been made in charging the proper offense, the
court shall dismiss the original information upon the
filing of a new one charging the proper offense,
provided the accused would not be placed in
double jeopardy.
Here there was a mistake in charging the
proper offense, which should have been frustrated
murder instead of less serious physical injuries, and
the filing of the new information would not place the
accused in double jeopardy since the graver
offense arose from facts discovered after the
91
accused had pleaded in the first case.
b)

No, my resolution would be different. In that
case the motion for substitution should not be
granted since the filing of the new information
would place the accused in double jeopardy.

The reason is that the intent to kill was known all
along to the prosecution even before the accused
pleaded to the information for less serious physical
injuries. Hence it would not fall within any of the
exceptions under 87 R117, particularly 87(b ).
91Although
S11 R119 (now S19 R119) apparently requires that in
substitution the accused cannot be convicted of the offense charged or any other
offense necessarily included therein, this provision should be read in conjunction
with S14 R110 which provides that substitution should not place the accused in
double jeopardy. Hence an assiduous reading of the two provisions would lead
to the conclusion that substitution is proper even if the accused can be convicted
of the offense charged in the original information or a necessarily included
offense, provided that the accused would not be placed in double jeopardy under
the new information.

557

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is reverse trial in criminal cases and when
may it be resorted to? Explain briefly. (07 Bar
Q5b ed)

A.

In criminal cases, reverse trial is a trial in which it is
the accused who presents his evidence ahead of
the prosecution, who may then present rebutting
evidence. It is called a reverse trial since it is the
reverse of the usual order of trial in which it is the
prosecution who first presents evidence.
In a criminal case, a reverse trial may be
resorted to if the accused admits the act or
omission charged in the complaint or information
but interposes a lawful defense. (S11 [e] R119).
The reason for conducting a reverse trial is
that the prosecution no longer needs to adduce
evidence to prove a judicial admission.

Q.

What is a demurrer to evidence?

A.

It is a motion to dismiss filed by the accused after
the prosecution has rested its case and grounded
on insufficiency of evidence. (S23 R119).

Q.

After the prosecution has rested its case, may
the courton its own initiative dismiss the case
on the ground of insufficiencyof evidence?

A.

Yes, provided the court gives the prosecution an
opportunity to be heard. (S23 R119).

Q.

What is the procedure for the filing of a
demurrer to evidence?

A.

After the prosecution has rested its case, the court
shall inquire from the accused if he desires to move
for leave of court to file a demurrer to evidence, or
to proceed with the presentationof his evidence.
558

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

If the accused orally moves for leave of court
to file a demurrer to evidence, the court shall orally
resolve the same. If the motion for leave is denied,
the court shall issue an order for the accused to
present and terminate his evidence on the dates
previously scheduled and agreed upon, and to
orally offer and rest his case on the day his last
witness is presented.
If despite the denial of the motion for leave, the
accused insists on filing the demurrer to evidence,
the previously scheduled dates for the accused to
present evidence shall be cancelled. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
Q.

Is leave of court required before the accused
may file a demurrer to evidence?

A.

No. However if the demurrer to evidence was filed
without leave of court and the demurrer is denied,
the accused waives the right to present evidence
and submits the case for judgment on the basis of
the prosecution evidence. If the demurrer was filed
with leave of court and later denied, the accused
may still adduce evidence in his defense. (823
R119). The purpose behind this provision is to deter
dilatory or unmeritorious demurrers to evidence.

Q.

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituin
who has been charged under RA 3019 (Anti-Graft
and
Corrupt
Practices
Act)
before the
Sandiganbayan. While Angela has posted bail,
she has yet to be arraigned. Angela revealed to
you that she has not been investigated for any
offense and that it was only when police officers
showed up at her residence with a warrant of
arrest that she learned of the pending case

559

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

against her. She wonders why she has been
charged before the Sandiganbayan when she is
not in government service.
a) xxx
b) What "during-trial" remedy can you use to
allow an early evaluation of the prosecution
evidence without the need of presenting
defense evidence; when and how can you
avail of this remedy? (13 Bar Q7)
A.

a) xxx
b) The "during-trial" remedy that I can use to allow
an early evaluation of the prosecution evidence
without the presentation of defense evidence is
a demurrer to evidence on the ground of
insufficiency of evidence. I can avail of this
remedy by filing a motion for leave to file
demurrer to evidence within 5 days after the
prosecution rests its case and which motion for
leave shall specifically state its grounds. While
I can file the demurrer to evidence without leave
of court, such would be risky since if the
demurrer is denied I would be deemed to have
waived the presentation of evidence and to
submit the case for judgment based on the
prosecution's evidence alone.

Q.

Carlos, the accused in a theft case, filed a
demurrer to evidence without leave of court.
The court denied the demurrer to evidence and
Carlos moved to present his evidence. The
court denied Carlos' motion to present evidence
and instead rendered judgment on the basis of
the evidence for the prosecution. Was the court
correct in preventing Carlos from presenting his

560

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

evidence and rendering judgment on the basis
of the evidence for the prosecution? Why?
(01 Bar Q1)
A.

Yes the court was correct. If the demurrer to
evidence was filed without leave of court and the
demurrer is denied, the accused waives the right to
present evidence and submits the case for
judgment on the basis of the prosecution evidence.

Q.

Facing a charge of murder, X filed a petition for
bail. The petitionwas opposed by the prosecution
but after hearing, the court granted bail to X. On
the first scheduled hearing on the merits, the
prosecution manifestedthat it was not adducing
additional evidence and that it was resting its
case. X filed a demurrer to evidence without
leave of court but it was denied by the court.
1) Did the court have the discretion to deny the
demurrerto evidenceunder the circumstances
mentioned above?
2) If the answer to the preceding question is in
the affirmative, can X adduce evidence in his
defense after the denial of his demurrer to
evidence?
3) Without further proceeding and on the sole
basis of the evidence of the prosecution,
can the court legally convict X for murder?
(98 Bar Q14).

A.
1) Yes the court had the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence.

561

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

It is axiomatic that an interlocutoryorder is not
final and conclusive and may be modified or set
aside by a trial court while it has jurisdiction
over the case.
Here the order of the court granting bail and
finding that the evidence of X's guilt is not strong is
an interlocutory order which may be set aside or
modified by the trial court. Hence the trial court had
the discretion to deny the demurrer even though
it had earlier ruled that the evidence of guilt was
not strong.
2) No X can no longer adduce evidence in his
defense after the denial of his demurrer to
evidence. If the demurrer to evidence was filed
without leave of court and the demurrer is
denied, the accused waives the right to present
evidence and submits the case for judgment on
the basis of the prosecutionevidence.
3) Yes the court can legally convict X for murder.
Under 88 R114, the evidence presented during
the bail hearingshall be consideredautomatically
reproduced during the trial. If the court finds
that the evidence is sufficient to prove X's guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, then it may legally
convict X for murder.
Q.

The prosecution filed its formal offer of exhibits.
On the same day, the accused filed a motion to
dismiss on the ground of the violation of his
right to a speedy trial and on the ground that
the trial court has no evidence to consider, that
the charge had no leg to stand on, and that the
prosecution witnesses had no knowledge of the
accused's participation or connection in the

562

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

crime. The trial court treated the motion to
dismiss as a demurrer, denied the same, and
deemed the accused to have waived the right to
present evidence since he filed the motion
without leave of court. Was the action of the
trial courtproper?
A.

No. The Supreme Court held that the motion to
dismiss cannot be treated as a demurrer to
evidence since a demurrer assumes that the
prosecution has already rested its case. Here, after
the prosecution filed its formal offer of exhibits, the
trial court still needed to give the accused an
opportunity to  object to the admission of those
exhibits. It also needed to rule on the formal offer.
And only after such a ruling could the prosecution
be deemed to have rested its case. Since Cabador
filed his motion to dismiss before he could object to
the prosecution's formal offer, before the trial court
could act on the offer, and before the prosecution
could rest its case, it could not be said that he had
intended his motion to dismiss to serve as a
demurrer to evidence. The motion is actually a
motion to dismiss based on the violation of the right
to a speedy trial. The trial court was directed to
resolve the motion to dismiss. (Cabador v. People,
G.R. 186001, 2 October 2009).

Q.

Within what time shall the accused file the
demurrer to evidence?

A.

Within a non-extendible period of 10 calendar days
from the date leave of court is granted. The
prosecution may file a comment to the demurrer to
evidence within a similar period from its receipt.
(Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases).
563

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The revised guidelines do not explicitly provide
for the period to file a demurrer where the accused's
motion for leave is denied, but it may be inferred that
the demurrer should be filed within 10 calendar days
from the date leave of court is denied.
Q.

May the order denying the motion for leave of
court to file demurrer to evidence or the order
denying the demurrer itself be reviewed by
appeal or certiorari before judgment?

A.

No. (823 R119). The purpose of the provision is to
prevent delay.

Q.

Distinguish a motion to quash from a demurrer
to evidence.

A.

A motion to quash is distinguished from a demurrer
to evidence (823 R119) as follows:
AS FOR TIME TO FILE. A motion to quash
should be filed before plea while a demurrer
to evidence is filed after the prosecution has rested
its case.
AS FOR GROUND/S. A motion to quash may
be filed on any of the grounds specified in S3 R 117
while a demurrer to evidence is grounded on
insufficiency of evidence alone.
AS FOR LEAVE OF COURT. Leave of court is
not needed for a motion to quash while leave of court
is necessary if the accused wants to retain the right to
present evidence in case of the demurrer's denial.

Q.

Respondent was charged in the Sandiganbayan
(SB) with the violation of Sec. 3(g) of the AntiGraft Law for entering into contracts manifestly
disadvantageous to the government. Respondent

564

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

pleaded not guilty. The prosecution and the
respondents entered into stipulations during
the pre-trial. Based on these stipulations, the
respondent filed a motion to quash on the
ground that "the facts charged do not
constitute an offense." The thrust of the motion
is that the respondent as a director of the GSIS
did not sign the minutes wherein the board
resolution approving the contract was passed.
The SB' granted the motion to quash and
dismissed the case. The Peopleappealedto the
SupremeCourt under R45.Will the appeal place
the accused in double jeopardy?
A.

No. While the ground of the motion to quash is
ostensibly that "the facts charged do not constitute
an offense," an analysis thereof reveals that it is
really grounded on insufficiency of evidence.
Insufficiency of evidence is not a ground of a
motion to quash but of a demurrer to evidence filed
after the prosecution has rested its case. In
dismissing the case based on insufficiency of
evidence before the Prosecution has presented its
evidence and rested its case, the SB deprived the
prosecution of due process. There was a denial of
due process resulting in loss of jurisdiction. The
dismissal was void for the SB acted without or in
excess of jurisdiction. Hence the dismissal order
was void and cannot be the basis of double
jeopardy. (People v. Dumlao, G.R. No. 168918, 2
March 2009).

Q.

The case against the accused was dismissed
upon a demurrer to evidence filed by the
accused. Subsequently a new information
charging the same offense was filed against the
accused. The accused filed a motion to quash
565

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the ground of double jeopardy. The
prosecution argued that double jeopardy will
not apply since the termination of the first case
was upon motion of the accused and hence
with his express consent. Is the prosecution's
argument correct?
A.

No. The dismissal of a case upon a demurrer to
evidence is equivalent to an acquittal. Hence the
prosecution cannot file anew the same charge nor
may the prosecution appeal from the order granting
the demurrer. (People v. City of Silay, G.R. No. L43790, 9 December 1976).

Q. After the prosecution had rested and made its
formal offer of evidence, with the court
admitting all of the prosecution evidence, the
accused filed a demurrerto evidencewith leave
of court. The prosecution was allowed to
comment thereon. Thereafter,the court granted
the demurrer, finding that the accused could
not have committed the offense charged. If the
prosecution files a motion for reconsideration
on the ground that the.court order granting the
demurrer was not in accord with the law and
jurisprudence, will the motion prosper? Explain
your answer. (09 Bar Q16a)
A.

No, the motion will not prosper.
The Supreme Court has held that the grant of
a demurrer to evidence is equivalent to an acquittal
upon the merits and is immediately final. (People v.
City Court of Si/ay, 9 Dec 1976). Hence the
prosecution cannot move for reconsideration for
that would place the accused in double jeopardy.

566

J9JC9B0M

Rule 119
Trial

Q.

If the accused's demurrer was granted by the
RTC not on the ground of insufficiency of
evidencebut on the ground of lack of jurisdiction
(althoughthe RTCactually had jurisdiction), may
the prosecution appeal from the_ order granting
the demurrer?

A.

Yes. the RTC did not decide the case on the merits,
let alone resolve the issue of petitioner's guilt or
innocence based on the evidence proffered by the
prosecution. This being the case, the RTC Order of
dismissal does not operate as an acquittal and
hence, may still be subject to ordinary appeal.
(Asistio v. People, 20 April 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

X was charged with the crime of serious slander
by deed in the Court of First Instance of Leyte.
After the prosecution had rested its case, X's
counsel moved to dismiss the case on the
ground that the guilt of X had not been proved
beyond reasonable doubt. The trial court
ordered the dismissal of the case but on a
different ground - lack of jurisdiction, which the
trial court legally had. From this erroneous
dismissal of the case, the prosecution appealed
to the Supreme Court. Will the appeal prosper?
Reasons. (78 Bar Q4b)

A.

No. In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that where a trial court has jurisdiction but
mistakenly dismisses the complaint or information for
lack of it, the order of dismissal is unappealable
because an appeal by the government therefrom
would place the accused in double jeopardy.
The only exception to this rule is where the
dismissal was made with the consent of the

567

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

accused. Here it cannot be said that the accused
consented to the dismissal, because his motion to
dismiss after the prosecution had rested its case
was based on another ground, that is, insufficiency
of the evidence. (Based on suggested answer
of UP Law Center, citing People v. Duran, 107
Phil. 979 [19601).92
Q.

Petitioner was the private complainant in a B.P.
22 criminal case against the respondent. After
the prosecution had presented its evidence,the
respondent filed with leave of court a demurrer
to evidence. The MeTC granted the demurrer
and dismissed the case without any finding that
the act or omission from which the civil liability
may arise did not exist. Petitioner appealedthe
civil aspect of the case to the RTC, contending
that the dismissal of the criminal case should
not include its civil aspect.
The RTC held that while the evidence
presentedwas insufficient to prove respondent's
criminal liability, it did not altogether extinguish
his civil liability. The RTCordered the remandof
the case to the MeTC"for further proceedings,
so that the respondent may adduce evidenceon
the civil aspect of the case." The petitioner
countered that the respondent waived the right
to present evidence on the civil aspect when he
filed the demurrer and also when the order of
dismissal was reversed by the RTC citing 51
R33. Did the respondentwaive the presentation
of evidence on the civil aspect?

92ln
the light of the subsequent case of Asistio v. People, 20 April 2015,
the answer should be that the appeal will prosper. Take note however that the
appeal, even if on a pure question of law, should be to the Court of Appeals (Tan
v. People, 381 SCRA 75).

568

Rule 119
Trial

A

No. If demurrer is granted and the accused is
acquitted by the court, the accused has the right to
adduce evidence on the civil aspect of the
case unless the court also declares that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did
not exist. In such a case the accused need not
adduce evidence since his civil liability ex delicto
was also extinguished.
Here, the MeTC granted the demurrer and
dismissed the case without any finding that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did not
exist. Hence the dismissal did not extinguish the
respondent's civil liability and he thus has the right to
adduce evidence on the civil aspect of the case.
The petitioner's contention that the respondent
waived the right to present evidence when the order
of dismissal was reversed on appeal is untenable.
Petitioner's citation of S1 R33 is incorrect. One of the
issues in a criminal case being the civil liability of the
accused arising from the crime, the governing law is
the Rules of Criminal Procedure, not the Rules of Civil
Procedure which pertains to a civil action arising from
the initiatory pleading that gives rise to the suit. (Hun
Hyung Park v Eung Won Choi, G.R. No. 165496, 12
February 2007, Carpio Morales, J.).

Q.

J9JC9B0M

In a B.P. Big. 22 case, the accused without leave
of court filed a demurrer to evidence. The
demurrer was granted by the court but it held
the accused civilly liable for damages to the
private complainant. The accused argued that
he should have been allowed to present his
evidence on the civil aspect of the case. Is the
accused correct?
569

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. When petitioner filed a demurrer to evidence
without leave of court, the whole case was
submitted for judgment on the basis of the evidence
presented by the prosecution as the accused is
deemed to have waived the right to present
evidence. At that juncture, the court is called upon
to decide the case including its civil aspect. (Alferez
v. People, 31 January 2011, Nachura, J.).

Q.

Distinguish the effects of the filing of a
demurrer to evidence in a criminal case and its
filing in a civil case. (07 Bar Q5a).

A.

In a criminal case the filing of a demurrer to
evidence results in the waiver of the accused to
adduce evidence if the filing was without leave and
the same is denied, while in a civil case the filing of
a demurrer to evidence does not need leave of
court and its denial will not result in a waiver of the
defendant to present evidence.
In a criminal case the grant of the demurrer to
evidence results in the acquittal of the accused and
hence the dismissal cannot be appealed, while in a
civil case, the grant of the demurrer to evidence
may be appealed and if on appeal the dismissal of
the case is reversed by the appellate court, the
defendant is deemed to have waived the
presentation of evidence.

570

J9JC9B0M

RULE120. JUDGMENT
Q.

Define judgment in a criminal case.

A.

A judgment is the court's adjudication that the
accused is guilty or not guilty of the offense
charged and the imposition on him of the proper
penalty and civil liability, if any. (81 R120).

Q.

What are the requisites of a judgment?

A.

The requisites of a judgment are: (POSS)
(a) It must be written in the official language.
(b) It must be personally and directly prepared by
the judge and signed by him.
(c) It shall contain clearly and distinctly a
statement of the facts and the law upon which
it is based. (81 R120).

Q.

What are the contents of a judgment?

A.

If the judgment is of conviction, it shall state:
(LAMP PC)

(1) The legal qualification of the offense and the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances
which attended its commission.
(2) The participationof the accused in the offense,
whetheras principal,accomplice,or accessory.
(3) The penalty imposed upon the accused.
(4) The civil liability or damages to be recovered by
the offended party from the accused, if there is
any, unless the civil action to recover the civil
liability arising from the offense charged has
been reserved or waived.
571

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

If the judgment is of acquittal, it shall state
whether the prosecution evidence absolutely failed
to prove the accused's guilt or merely failed to
prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt. In either
case, the judgment shall determine if the act or
omission from which the civil liability might arise did
not exist. (S2 R120).

Q.

Lidelia filed a complaint for estafa against
Conchita for issuing four bouncing checks to
her. During the trial, Conchita did not deny her
indebtednessof P33,000to Lidelia but contended
that the checks were issued in payment of a
pre-existing obligation. The RTC rendered
judgment acquitting Conchita. In its judgment,
the RTCdecreedthus:
Verily, for all said, the Court strongly
believesthat in the case at bar, the prosecution,
to say the least, failed to establish the guilt of
accused beyond a reasonable doubt. That, herein,

it appearsthat if accusedhad any obligation,it is
simply civil in nature that could be properly
ventilatedwithin the contextof civil law.
WHEREFORE,in view of all the foregoing,
and considering that the prosecution failed to
establish the guilt of accused Conchita beyond
a reasonable doubt, the Court finds accused
Conchita NOT GUil TY of all the above-entitled
four (4) criminal information and ACQUITSher
therefrom,with costs de oficio.
Lidelia filed a motion for reconsideration
praying that the portion of the decision
regarding the civil liability of the accused be
reconsidered and thereafter the accused who

572

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

had admitted her civil liability be ordered to pay
the sum of P33,000. Lidelia's motion for
reconsideration was denied, the trial court
stating that since Conchita was acquitted, it
could not award civil damages.May Lidelia avail
of mandamusto compel the trial court to award
her civil damages?
A.

Yes. If an accused is acquitted, it does not
necessarily follow that no civil liability arising from
the acts complained of may be awarded in the
same judgment.
The prevailing rule as enunciated by the
Supreme Court en bane in the case of Padilla v.
Court of Appeals (129 SCRA 558) is that the Court
may acquit an accused on reasonable doubt and
still order the payment of civil damages already
proved in the same case without need for a
separate civil action. (Maximo v. Gerochi, G.R. No.
47994, 24 September 1986, e.b.). The duty of the
criminal court, in case of acquittal, to determine if
the act or omission from which the civil liability
might arise exists is a duty which may be compelled
by mandamus. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 365-366 [61h rev.
ed., 1989]).

 Q.

Rimando issued 3 postdated check to the Sps.
Aldaba to accommodate their investment in
Multitel Corporation. The checks bounced for
insufficiency of funds. Rimandowas prosecuted
for the violation of B.P. Big. 22 and for estafa
under Article 315(2)(d) of the Revised Penal
Code. Rimando was acquitted in the BP 22
cases on the ground of reasonabledoubt, with
a declaration that the act or omission from
573

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

which liability may arise does not exist. Later
Rimando was acquitted also in the estafa case
but with the pronouncement that he was civilly
liable to the Spouses Rimando for the value of
the postdated checks. On appeal, Rimando
contended that her acquittal and exoneration
from the civil liability in the BP 22 cases should
have barred Sps. Aldaba from claiming civil
liability from her in the estafa case. Is
Rimando's contention correct?

A.

No. Rimando's acquittal and subsequent exoneration
in the BP 22 cases had no effect in the estafa case,
even if both cases were founded on the same
factual circumstances. While a BP 22 case and an
estafa case may be rooted from an identical set of
facts, they nevertheless present different causes of
action, which, under the law, are considered
"separate, distinct, and independent" from each
other. Therefore, both cases can proceed to their
final adjudication - both as to their criminal and civil
aspects -subject to the prohibition on double
recovery. Perforce, a ruling in a BP 22 case
concerning the criminal and civil liabilities of the
accused cannot be given any bearing whatsoever
in the criminal and civil aspects of a related estafa
case. (Rimando v.
Aldaba, 13 October 2014,
Perlas-Bernabe, ,J.).

Q.

How is a judgment promulgated?

A.

The judgment is promulgated by reading it in the
presence of the accused and of any judge of the
court in which it was rendered. (S6 R120). Hence
the judgment may be promulgated by a judge who
did not write the decision provided that he is a
judge of the court in which judgment was rendered.
574

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

Q.

What is the exception to the rule that the
judgment shall be promulgated by reading it in
the presence of the accused and the judge?

A.

If the conviction is for a light offense, the judgment
may be pronounced in the presence of the
accused's counsel or representative.
When the judge is absent, the judgment may
be promulgated by the clerk of court. (S6 R120).

Q.

How is the judgmentpromulgated if the accused is
confined or detained in another province or city?

A.

If the accused is confined or detained in another
province or city, the judgment may be promulgated
by the executive judge of the RTC having jurisdiction
over the place of confinement or detention upon
request of the court which rendered the judgment.
The court promulgating the judgment shall have
authority to accept the notice of appeal and to
approve the bail bond pending appeal. However if
the decision of the trial court convicting the accused
changed the nature of the offense from non-bailable
to bailable, the application for bail can only be filed
and resolved by the appellate court. (S6 R120).

Q.

How is notice of the promulgation given to the
accused?

A.

The proper clerk of court shall give notice to the
accused personally or through his bondsman or
warden and counsel, requiring him to be present at
the promulgation of the decision. If the accused
was tried in absentia because he jumped bail or
escaped from prison, the notice shall be served at
his last known address. (S6 R120).

575

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

How should the judgment be promulgated if the
accused fails to appear at the scheduled date of
promulgationdespite notice?

A.

The promulgation shall be made by recording the
judgment in the criminal docket and serving the
accused a copy thereof at his last known address
or through his counsel.
If the judgment is for conviction and the failure
of the accused to appear was without justifiable
cause, he shall lose the remedies available under
the Rules of Court (e.g., appeal, certiorari) and the
court shall order his arrest. (86 R120).

Q.

What is the recourse of the accused who has lost
his remedies for failure to appear during the
promulgation of the judgmentof conviction?

A.

Within 15 days from promulgation of judgment, the
accused may surrender and file a motion for leave
of court to avail of the remedies under the Rules of
Court. He shall state the reasons for his absence
at the scheduled promulgation and if he proves that
his absence was for a justifiablecause, he shall be
allowed to avail of said remedies within 15 days
from notice. (86 R120).

Q.

A, 8, C, and D were convicted of murder by the
RTC. Only D personally appeared during the
promulgation of the judgment. Subsequently
without surrendering and explaining the reasons
for their absence, A, B, and C joined D in their joint
motion for reconsideration. The RTC took
cognizance of the joint motion for reconsideration
and later issued an order acquitting A and B and
downgrading the conviction of C and D from
murder to homicide. The People filed a special civil
576

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

action for certiorari with the Court of Appeals to
annul the order. A, B, C, and D argued that the
petition for certiorari would place them in double
jeopardy. Was their argument correct?

A.

A, B, and C's argument was not correct.
Under S6 R120, the accused who fails to
appear without justifiable cause during the
promulgation shall lose the remedies available in
the Rules of Court against the judgment and the
court shall order his arrest. However within 15 days
from promulgation of the judgment, the accused
may surrender and file a motion for leave of court to
avail of these remedies.
Here the RTC clearly exceeded its jurisdiction
when it not only failed to cause the arrest of A, B,
and C who were at large but also took cognizance
of their joint motion despite the fact that they did not
surrender and file a motion for leave of court to
avail of remedies. Hence A, B, and C were not
placed in double jeopardy because the RTC acted
without jurisdiction and thus its order was void.
However D is correct in his argument that the
petition for certiorari would place him in double
jeopardy. He was in custody and present at the
promulgation of the judgment. Hence the RTC
never lost jurisdiction over his person and thus the
RTC's ruling downgrading his conviction from
murder to homicide stands. (People v. De Grano,
G.R. No. 167710, 5 June 2009).

Q.

The petitioner and his wife Marinel Salvador
were charged in the RTC with estafa under
Article 315 of the Revised Penal Code. On 30
March 2011, the date scheduled for the

577

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

promulgation of the judgment, their counsel
moved for the deferment of the promulgation
inasmuch as the petitioner was allegedly
suffering from hypertension. Unconvinced of
the reason, the RTC proceeded to promulgate
its decision convicting the Petitioner and his
wife and sentencing them to imprisonmentof 4
years and two months of prision correctional to
20 years of reclusion temporal.
The RTC then issued a warrant for the
petitioner's arrest. He was apprehended on 7
April 2011,or eight daysfrom the promulgationof
the judgment finding him guilty. The petitioner
filed his Motion for Leave to file Notice of Appeal
dated 13 April 2011, and attached thereto the
medical certificate dated 30 March 2011
purportedlyissued by Dr. Paulo MiguelA. David,
certifying that the petitioner had submitted
himself to a medical consultation at the Rizal
MedicalCenter on 30 March2011 and had been
found to be suffering from hypertension. The
prosecution opposed the motion attaching the
affidavit of Dr. David stating that he never
examined the petitioner and that he never
issued the medical certificate dated 30 March
2011.The RTC nonethelessgranted Petitioner's
motion and gave due course to the Petitioner's
appeal.The Respondent,who was the offended
party, filed a petition for certiorari with the
Court of Appeals to set aside the RTC's order
granting Petitioner's motion for leave to file
notice of appeal. The Petitioner argues that the
Respondenthas no legal standing to assail the
RTC's order as it is only the Office of the
Solicitor Generalwho can representthe People
578

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

in proceedings before the CA and the SC. Did
the Respondent have legal standing to assail
the RTC's order?

A.

Yes. The Court has stressed that the People of the
Philippines, being the real party in interest in every
criminal proceedings, can be represented only by
the OSG in criminal proceedings in the CA or in the
SC. Yet, this rule admits of exceptions. A special
civil action for certiorari may be filed by an
aggrieved party alleging grave abuse of discretion
amounting to excess or lack of jurisdiction on the
part of the trial court. The term "aggrieved parties"
includes the State and the private offended party
or complainant.
There was grave abuse of discretion on the
part of the RTC since its order giving due course to
Petitioner's appeal was in clear violation of S6
R120 which requires that the accused's failure to
appeal during the promulgation was with justifiable
cause and that the accused should prove such
justifiable cause. Here the certification purportedly
issued by Dr. David was proved to be spurious.
(Salvador v, Chua, 15 July 2015, Bersamin, J.).93

Q.

Upon a tip from a confidential informant(Cl), the
police officers together with the Cl proceeded to
conducta buy-bustoperation in which one of the
police officers acted as the poseur-buyer. The
police team arrested the accused after he was
caught in flagrante selling to the police officers.
During the trial the accused filed with leave of

93The
Supreme Court also said that the accused did not fulfill the
requirement of surrendering himself. (The accused was arrested eight days after
the promulgation). It is submitted that even if the accused did not surrender but
was arrested, he may still avail of the remedies if he files a motion for leave and
he proves that his absence during the promulgation was for a justifiable cause.

579

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

court a demurrer to evidence. The judge granted
the demurrer to evidence on the reasoning that
the prosecution's failure to present the testimony
of the Cl was fatal to its case since the Cl's
testimony is indispensable. The prosecutionwent
up to the SC on a petition for certiorari under R65
seeking to set aside the judge's order granting
the demurrer. The accused argued that the
petition should be dismissed on the ground of
double jeopardy. May the petition for certiorari
be granted?
A.

Yes. There is no double jeopardy since the order
granting the demurrer was made with grave abuse
of discretion amounting to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction. It is settled that the testimony of an
informant is not indispensable if there is other
independent evidence proving the guilt of the
acused. Here the other police officers had personal
knowledge of the accused's guilt as they were the
ones who caught the accused in flagrante. The SC
ordered the remand of the case to the trial court for
reception of the defense evidence. (People v.
Judge Lagos, 6 March 2013, Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

The accused Sevillawas chargedwith falsification
of public documentunderArt. 171 (4) of the Revised
Penal Code. The prosecution alleged that on the
first day of his term as councilor of the City of
Malabon, Sevilla made a false narration in his
PersonalDataSheet(PDS)to wit: that in answerto
the question of whetherthere is a pendingcriminal
case against him, Sevilla marked the box
corresponding to the "no" answer despite the
pendencyof a criminalcaseagainst him for assault
upon an agent of a person in authority before the
MetropolitanTrial Court of MalabonCity, Branch55.

580

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

The Sandiganbayanfound that accused could not
be convicted of falsification of public document
since he did not act with malicious intent to falsify
the entry but nonethelessconvictedhim of reckless
imprudence resulting to falsification of public
documentunder Article 365 of the RPCconsidering
that Sevilla's PDS was haphazardlyand recklessly
done,which resultedin the false entry therein.Was
the accused'sconviction proper?
A.

Yes. In case of variance between the allegation and
proof, a defendant may be convicted of the offense
proved when the offense charged is included in or
necessarily includes the offense proved. There is
no dispute that a variance exists between the
offense alleged against Sevilla and that proved by
the prosecution - the Information charged him with
the intentional felony of falsification of public
document under Article 171 (4) of the RPC while the
prosecution was able to prove reckless imprudence
resulting to falsification of public documents.
Parenthetically, the question that has to be
resolved then is whether reckless imprudence
resulting to falsification of public document is
necessarily included in the intentional felony of
falsification of public document under Article 171 (4)
of the RPC. The answer is in the affirmative.
(Sevilla v. People, 13 August 2014).

Q.

Accused, a regional director of the Department
of Agriculture, was charged with falsification of
public document under Article 171 of the
Revised Penal Code, committed by falsifying
his post-travel report submitted in order to
liquidate his cash advances. The Sandiganbayan
convicted him of falsification of private document
under Article 172(2), committed by altering his
581

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

PAL ticket. On appeal, accused raised only two
arguments: that he was not the one who altered
the plane ticket and that he had no intent to
cause damage. May his conviction be set aside
on the ground that he could not be convicted
of falsification of private document since
that would violate his constitutional right to
be informed of the nature and the cause of
the accusation?
A.

Yes. An appeal in a criminal case opens the whole
matter for the review of any question, including
those questions not raised by the parties. In this
case, a review is necessary because the conviction
was made in violation of the accused's
constitutional rights.
Convicting the accused of falsification of
private document under Article 172(2) of the RPC
would violate the accused's right to be informed of
the charge against him since the offense charged
and the offense for which he was convicted are
clearly different.94 (Malabanan v. Sandiganbayan, 2
August 2017, Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

Accused was charged in an information with
rape through sexual intercourse committed
against a 15-year-old minor. The information
alleged that the accused with lewd design had
sexual intercourse with the 15-year-old minor
through force and intimidation contrary to
Article 266-A, in relation to Article 266-B, of the
Revised Penal Code.

94The
Supreme Court stated that the proper charge to consider was the
crime penalized under Article 171 (2) since a plane ticket is a commercial
document. The Court however stated that the accused could not be convicted
thereof since there was no mens rea, the accused altering the plane ticket to
make it consistent with the deferred date of his re-scheduled travel.

582

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

During the trial, the victim testified that the
accused inserted his finger into her vagina. The
RTC convicted the accused of rape by sexual
assault since instead of a penile penetration there
was a digital penetration of the victim's private
part. On appeal, the Court of Appeals ordered the
remand of the case to the RTC. The CA held that
although the accused was clearly guilty of rape by
sexual assault, what the trial court should have
done was to direct the state prosecutor to file a
new information charging the proper offense, and
after compliance therewith, to dismiss the original
information in accordance with the last paragraph
of 514 R110and 519 R119.
a) Was the CA's order to remand the case correct?
b) May the CA convict the accused instead of
rape by sexual assault based on the
variance doctrine?
A.
a) No. The last paragraph of S14 R110 and S19
R119 are applicable only before judgment has
been rendered. When the judgment was
reviewed by the CA, the RTC had already
rendered a judgment of conviction.
b) No. The variance doctrine allows the conviction
of an accused for a crime proved which is
different from but necessarily included in the
crime charged. Rape by sexual assault is not
necessarily included or subsumed in rape
through sexual intercourse. The accused may
however be convicted of lascivious conduct
against a child under Sec. 5(b) of R.A. No.
7610, which offense is necessarily included in

583

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the offense charged. (People v. Caoili, 8 August
2017, e.b., Tijam, J.).
Q.

May an accused charged with the sale of
marijuana be convicted of the possession of
marijuana?

A.

Yes. The crime of illegal sale included or absorbed
the crime of illegal possession. The rule is that
when there is a variance between the offense
charged in the complaint or information, and that
proved or established by the evidence, and the
offense as charged necessarily includes the
offense proved, the accused shall be convicted of
the offense proved included in that which is
charged. (84 R120; People v. Manansala, 3 April
2013, Bersamin,J.).

Q. When does a judgment of conviction become final?

A.

A judgment of conviction becomes final: (PAWS)
(a) After the lapse of the period to appeal.
(b) Partial or total service of the sentence.
(c) Waiver in writing of the right to appeal.
(d) Accused has applied for probation. (87 R120).

Q.

Petitioner was found guilty of homicide and
sentenced to imprisonment of 12 years, 1
month and 1 day to 20 years and to pay the
heirs of the victim P32,000 for funeral expenses
and P30,000 as death indemnity. The judgment
became final and executory in 1989. Almost two
decades passed from the entry of judgment, in
2009, private respondent, claiming to be the son
of the deceased victim, filed a Motion for

584

J9JC9B0M

Rule 120
Judgment

Execution of Judgment. He alleged, among
others, that despite his request to the City
Prosecutor to file a motion for execution, the
judgment has not been enforced because said
prosecutor has not acted upon his request. The
Petitioner opposed the motion contending that
the judgment can no longer be enforced
pursuant to 56 R39. Should the RTC grant the
motion for execution?
A.

With respect to the penalty of imprisonment, the
judgment may be enforced. The applicable provision is
not S6 R39 but Article 93 of the Revised Penal Code.
Pursuant to Article 93, the period of prescription of the
penalty did not start to run since the Petitioner did not
evade the service of his sentence by escaping from
imprisonment. Since the penalty had not prescribed,
the same may be enforced by arresting the Petitioner
to serve his sentence.
With respect however to the civil liability, the
judgment may no longer be enforced. The civil
liability arising from the offense has prescribed
pursuant to Article 1144(3) of the Civil Code, in
relation to S6 R39. (Basilonia v. Villaruz, 10 August
2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

In Criminal Case No. 28293,the Sandiganbayan
found petitioner Escobar guilty of malversation.
The Sandiganbayan held that petitioners
Escobar, Telesforo, and Cagang approved the
disbursement voucher despite the fact that it
lacked the documentation required under COA
Circular No. 96-003dated February27, 1996.
The petitioner argued that he could no
longer be convicted of malversation since the

585

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Sandiganbayan in Criminal Case No. 28331,
which arose from the same COA Audit Report
and Ombudsman Resolution dated August 11,
2004, had relied on the testimonies of Gadian and
Cailing and held that petitioner Escobar is not an
accountable officer for purposes of Article 217 of
the Revised Penal Code. Hence under the
principle of conclusiveness of judgment, the
issue of whether the petitioner was an
accountable officer could no longer be relitigated
in a subsequent case. Is the petitioner correct?
A.

No. Except with respect to civil cases impliedly
instituted, res judicata is not applicable in criminal
proceedings. This Court has expressly stated this
rule multiple times. At most, the applicable concept
of res judicata is that of res judicata in prison grey
as double jeopardy which is not in question here.
The argument that conclusiveness of judgment
bars this case considering that the Sandiganbayan
already found that Escobar is not an accountable
officer, which was an error of law in light of Zoleta v.
Sandiganbayan, will lead to an absurd effect. Once a
person has been acquitted of a crime, despite the
ground being a question of law resolved erroneously,
once that decision is final, that person can commit the
exact same crime against the same party with
impunity, under the claim that even where the subject
matter differs, the erroneous application of the law is
forever binding on those parties. Thus, this argument
cannot be countenanced. ~Escobar v. People, 20
November 2017, Leanen, J.). 5

95A
perusal of the facts also shows that there can be no conclusiveness of
judgment since there is no identity of subject matter between the two Sandiganbayan
cases, which identity is a requisite for the application of the principle of conclusiveness

586

J9JC9B0M

RULE 121. NEW TRIAL OR
RECONSIDERATION
Q.

When may the court grant a new trial or
reconsideration?

A.

At any time before a judgment of conviction
becomes final, the court may, on motion of the
accused or at its own instance but with the consent
of the accused, grant a new trial or reconsideration.
(S1 R121).

Q.

May
the
prosecution move
for
the
reconsiderationof a judgment of conviction?

A.

No. Under 81 R121 only the accused may move for
such a reconsideration. The reason is that the
accused would be placed in double jeopardy. It is
submitted however that a motion for reconsideration
is proper if the prosecutionis going to challenge the
judgment of conviction on the ground that it was
issued with grave abuse of discretion amounting to
lack of or excess of jurisdiction.

Q.

What are the grounds for a new trial?

A.

The court shall grant a new trial on any of the
following grounds: (PN)
(a) PREJUDICIAL ERRORS OR IRREGULA
RITIES. Errors of law or irregularities prejudicial to
the substantial rights of the accused have been
committed during the trial.

of judgment. Although the two cases were tackled in the same COA report, they
involveddifferent amounts, different transactions, and different checks.

587

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b) NEWLY DISCOVERED EVIDENCE. New
and material evidence has been discovered which
the accused could not with reasonable diligence
have discovered and produced at the trial and
which if introduced and admitted would probably
change the judgment. (82 R121).
Q.

What are the grounds for reconsideration?

A.

The court shall grant reconsideration on the ground
of errors of law or fact in the judgment, which do not
require further proceedings. (83 R121 ).

Q.

What are the requisites before a new trial may
be granted on the ground of newly discovered
evidence? (DCWAN)

A.

The requisites are:
(a) The newly discovered evidence could not with
reasonable diligence have been discovered
and produced at the trial.
(b)

If introduced and admitted, such evidence
would probably change the judgment.

(c) The motion for new trial shall be in writing and
shall state the grounds on which it is based.
(d) The motion must be supported by affidavits of
witnesses by whom such evidence is expected
to be given or by duly authenticated copies of
documents which are proposed to be
introduced in evidence.
(e)

Notice of the motion shall be given to the
prosecutor. (82 & 4, R121 ).

588

J9JC9B0M

Rule 121
New Trial Or Reconsideration

Q.

What are the effects of granting a new trial or
reconsideration?

A.

The effects of granting a new trial or reconsideration
are the following:
(a) When a new trial is granted on the ground of
prejudicial errors or irregularities, all the
proceedings and evidence affected thereby
shall be set aside and taken anew (sata). The
court may in the interest of justice allow the
introduction of additional evidence. Note that it
is not the entire proceedings and evidence but
only those affected which shall be set aside.
(b) When a new trial is granted on the ground of
newly discovered evidence, the evidence
already adduced shall stand and the newly
discovered and such other evidence as the court
may in the interest of justice allow to be
introduced shall be taken and considered
together with the evidence already in the record.
(c) In all cases when the court grants new trial or
reconsideration, the originaljudgment shall be
set aside or vacated and a new judgment
rendered accordingly. (S6 R121 ).

589

J9JC9B0M

RULE 122. APPEAL
Q.

What are the effects of an appeal from a
judgment of conviction?

A.

The following are the effects of an appeal from a
judgment of conviction:
(a)

Upon perfection of the appeal, the execution
of the judgment or final order shall be stayed
as to the appealing party. (811[c] R122).
There is no motion for execution pending
appeal of a judgment of conviction. Note
however that the execution of a judgment or
final order of indirect contempt shall not be
suspended by an appeal unless the person
adjudged in contempt files a bond. (811 R71 ).

(b) The appeal throws open the entire case for
review and this includes the penalty which may
be increased. The appeal is a review de novo
and is not limited to the assigned errors.
(People v. De Leon, 356 8CRA 471 ).
Compare with the rule in civil cases in which
the appellate court can consider only those
questions of fact or law which were raised
below and which were assigned as errors on
appeal. (815 R44).
Q.

To what court may an appeal be taken?

A.

An appeal may be taken as follows:
(a) To the RTC in cases decided by the MTC.
(b) To the Court of Appeals in cases decided by
the RTC.
590

J9JC9B0M

Rule 122
Appeal

(c) To the Supreme Court in cases decided by the
Court of Appeals, the Sandiganbayan, and the
Court of Tax Appeals en bane. (82 R122,
81 [b] Rule X Revised Internal Rules of the
Sandiganbayan, S 19 CTA Act).
Q.

How is an appeal taken?

A.
(a)

The appeal to the RTC or to the Court of
Appeals in cases decided by the RTC in the
exercise of its original jurisdiction shall be by
notice of appeal filed with the court which
rendered the judgment or final order appealed
from and by serving a copy of the notice of
appeal upon the adverse party.

(b) The appeal to the CA in cases decided by the
RTC in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
shall be by petition for review under R42.
(c)

The appeal in cases where the penalty imposed
by the RTC is reclusion perpetua or life
imprisonment or where a lesser penalty is
imposed but for offenses committed on the same
occasion or which arose out of the same
occurrence that gave rise to the more serious
offense for which the penalty of death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment is imposed (coso
asog), shall be by notice of appeal to the CA in
accordance with S3(a) R122.

(d)

No notice of appeal is necessary in cases where
the RTC imposed the death penalty. The CA
shall automatically review the judgment.

591

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(e)

Except where the penalty of reclusion
perpetua or life imprisonment is imposed, an
appeal to the SC shall be by petition for review
on certiorari under R45.

Q. What is the remedy of an aggrieved party in a
criminal case from the trial court's order
granting a motion to withdraw information?
A.

Appeal. Such an order is a final order which is
appealable pursuant to S1 R122. (Personal
Direct Sellinl v. Carandang, 8 November 2017,
Leonen, J.).9
.

Q. Quilesete was convicted by the RTC of
Malversation. Aggrieved, Quileste appealed to
the CA. However the CA dismissed outrightthe
appeal because Quileste failed to furnish the
OSG a copy of his Motion for Extension to File
Appellant's Brief and his Appellant's Brief in
violation of 53 R124. Quilesete's motion for
reconsiderat
ion was denied. Was the outright
dismissal of the appeal warranted?
A.

Yes. This case involves malversation of public
funds, punishable under Article 217 of the Revised
Penal Code, committed by a low-ranking public
officer (with salary grade below SG 27). Thus the
case was correctly filed with, and tried by, the RTC,
the court that has exclusive original jurisdiction over
the case. Upon Quileste's conviction by the RTC,
his remedy should have been an appeal to the
Sandiganbayan, pursuant to PD No. 1606, as
amended by Republic Act (R.A.) No. 7975 and R.A.
96

Necessarily,

the appeal would be brought by the offended party. It is
submitted that the appeal may be availed of by the offended party only if there was
grave abuse of discretion or if the appeal is limited to the civil aspect of the case.

592

J9JC9B0M

Rule 122
Appeal

No. 8249, specifically Section 4 thereof. (Quilesete
v. People, 18 February 2009, Nachura, J.).
Q.

Accused was charged and convicted by the
RTC of Malversation of Public Funds through
Falsification of Public Documents. Accused
filed a notice of appeal with the RTC which
erroneously elevated the records to the CA
rather than the Sandiganbayan (SB). Accused
filed three motions for extension to file appeal
brief. When he noticed the error in the appeal,
he filed a motion to endorse the appeal to the
SB. The motion was denied by the CA. Should
the motion to endorse the appeal to the SB have
been granted?

A. Yes. The petitioner is a low-ranking public officer
having a salary grade below 27, whose appeal from
the RTC's ruling convicting him of six (6) counts of
Malversation of Public Funds Through Falsification
of Public Documents falls within the appellate
jurisdiction of the SB. Thus, since petitioner's case
properly falls within the appellate jurisdiction of
the Sandiganbayan, his appeal was erroneously
taken to the CA.
This notwithstanding, the error is not primarily
attributable to petitioner, since the duty to transmit
the records to the proper court devolves upon
the RTC.
Notably, petitioner did not specify that his
appeal be taken to the CA. This was precisely
because it was not even his duty to designate to
which court his appeal should be taken. Case law
states that "[i]n the notice of appeal[,] it is not even
requiredthat the appellant indicate the court to which
593

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

its appeal is being interposed. The requirement is
merely directory and failure to comply with it or error
in the court indicated is not fatal to the appeal", as it
should be in this case. (Dizon v. People, 24 January
2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

B, C, D and E were convicted by the RTC. B
appealed but C, D, and E did not. Will the appeal
of B affect C, D, and E?

A.

No except insofar as the judgment of the appellate
court is favorable and applicable to C, D, and E.
(S11[a] R122).

Q.

B, C, D and- E were convicted of murder by the
RTC. The RTC relied principally and heavily on
the testimony of X, the lone eyewitness. Only B
appealed and C, D, and E served sentence. On
appeal to the SC, the latter reversed the RTC's
judgment finding that the testimony of X bereft
of any credence. Will the acquittal of B also
result in the acquittal of C, D, and E?

A.

Yes. An appeal taken by one or more of several
accused shall not affect those who did not appeal,
except insofar as the judgment of the appellate
court is favorable and applicable to the latter. Here
the SC judgment finding X's testimony bereft of
credence is favorable and applicable to C, D, and E
since their conviction was also anchored on X's
testimony. (People v. Webb, G.R. No. 176864, 14
December 2010).

Q.

Crispian and Derek were charged with the sale
of illegal drugs. The information charged them
with selling the same sachet of shabu. Both
were convicted but only Crispian appealed.
The SC acquitted Crispian because of the

594

J9JC9B0M

Rule 122
Appeal

failure of the police officers to comply with the
chain of custody rule. Will Crispian's acquittal
likewise result in the acquittal of Derek?

A.

Yes. 811 (a) R122 states that "[a]n appeal taken by
one or more of several accused shall not affect
those who did not appeal, except insofar as the
judgment of the appellate court is favorable and
applicable to the latter."
Here Derek was charged in Criminal Case No.
21618 for the alleged illegal sale of sachet of
shabu is the same sachet for which Crispian was
charged also in Criminal Case No. 21618, and
hence, part of the seized items whose integrity and
evidentiary value had been compromised. (People
v. Lumaya, 7 March 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

A, B, C, and D were convicted by the RTC of
homicide for the killing of X. C and D appealed
. to the Court of Appeals which found them guilty
of murder instead, on a finding that all of the
accused employed treachery. May A and B be
found guilty of murder also?

A.

No. An appeal taken by one or more of several
accused shall not affect those who did not appeal,
except insofar as the judgment of the appellate
court is favorable and applicable to the latter.
(S11[a] R122).
Here while the judgment of the CA may be
applicable to A and B, it is not favorable to them.

Q.

In an Information charging them of Murder,
policemen A, B, and C were convicted of
Homicide. A appealed from the decision but B
and C did not. B started serving his sentence but

595

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

C escaped and is at large. In the Court of
Appeals, A applied for bail but was denied.
Finally the Court of Appeals rendereda decision
acquitting A on the ground that the evidence
pointedto the NPAas the killers of the victim.
1) xxx

2) Can B and C be benefited by the decision of
the Court of Appeals? (98 Bar Q13)
A.
2) Yes Band C can be benefited by the decision of
the Court of Appeals. An appeal taken by one
or more of several accused shall not affect
those who did not appeal, except insofar as the
judgment of the appellate court is favorable and
applicable to the latter. (S11[a] R122). Here the
judgment of the Court of Appeals is favorable
and applicable to B and C because the court
found that it was not them but the NPA
who killed the victim.
While C's escape resulted in the dismissal of
his appeal (S8 R124), it did not preclude the
application of S11(a) R122 since the provision
applies even to one who did not appeal.

Q.

P02 Eduardo Valdez and his brother Edwin
Valdez were charged with three counts of
murder of the Sayson brothers. The information
in each count reads as follows:
That on or about the 1st day of March,2000,
in Quezon City, Philippines, the above-named
accused conspiring together, confederating
with and mutually helping each other, with
intent to kill, qualified with treachery, did, then
596

J9JC9B0M

Rule 122
Appeal

and there, willfully, unlawfully and feloniously,
assault, attack and employ personal violence
upon the person of one FERDINANDSAYSONY
DABOCOL by then and there shooting him with
a gun, hitting him on his head, thereby inflicting
upon him serious and mortal wound which was
the direct and immediate cause of his death, to
the damage and prejudice of the heirs of the
said FERDINANDSAYSONY DABOCOL[etc.].
The Valdez brothers were convicted of
murder by the RTC which conviction was
affirmed by the CA. The brothers appealedto the
SC but subsequently Edwin withdrew his appeal
which withdrawal was approved by the SC.
a) May the conviction of Eduardo for murder be
reduced to one for homicide?
b) Assuming that Eduardo's conviction for
murder may be reduced to homicide, should
Edwin's conviction be likewise reduced to
hornlcldev
A.
a) Yes Eduardo's conviction for murder may be
reduced to one for homicide.
The State must specifically aver the factual
circumstances or particular acts that constitute the
criminal conduct or that qualify or aggravate the
liability for the crime in the interest of affording the
accused sufficient notice to defend himself.
The averments of the informations to the effect
that the two accused "with intent to kill, qualified
with treachery did xxx assault, attack and employ
personal violence upon" the victims "by then and

597

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

there shooting [them] with a gun, hitting [them]" on
various parts of their bodies "which [were] the direct
and immediate cause of [their] death[s]" did not
sufficiently set forth the facts and circumstances
describing how treachery attended each of the killings.
Merely averring the killing of a person by shooting him
with a gun, without more, did not show how the
execution of the crime was directly and specially
ensured without risk to the accused from the defense
that the victim might make. Indeed, the use of the gun
as an instrument to kill was not per se treachery,
for there are other instruments that could serve the
same lethal purpose. Nor did the use of the
term treachery constitute a sufficient averment, for that
term, standing alone, was nothing but a conclusion of
law, not an averment of a fact. In short, the particular
acts and circumstances constituting treachery as an
attendant circumstance in murder were missing from
the informations. (People v. Valdez, 18 January
2012, Bersamin, J.).
b) Yes. S11(a) R122 provides that "[a]n appeal
taken by one or more of several accused shall not
affect those who did not appeal, except insofar as
the judgment of the appellate court is favorable
and applicable to the latter." Here the evidence
against and the conviction of both Eduardo and
Edwin are inextricably linked, considering that the
two accused have acted in concert in their deadly
assault against the victims, warranting their equal
liabiliy under the principle of conspiracy. Hence,
the downgrading of Eduardo's conviction, which is
favorable and applicable to Edwin, should benefit
the latter. (People v. Valdez, 13 February 2013,
Bersamin, J.).

598

J9JC9B0M

RUie 122
Appeal

Q.

Drew was charged and convicted by the MeTC
of Las Pinas City with the crime of falsification
of private documents.Thejudgment of conviction
was promulgated on 1 April 2008 in the
presence of Drew and his counsel.
(a) Up to when may Drew appeal, to what court
shall he take his appeal, and how shall he
take his appeal?
(b) Assume that on 14 April 2008 Drew filed a
motion for reconsideration and the same
was denied on 14 May 2008, a copy of
which Drew received on 18 May 2008. Up
to when may Drew appeal? Explain.
(c) Would your answer be the same if the
crime of which Drew was convicted was the
violation of B.P. Big. 22? Explain.
Drew was able to timely appeal to the RTC.
The RTC renderedjudgment denying the appeal
of Drew. Drew received a copy of the judgment
on 1 April 2009. Drew plans to appeal the RTC
decision on pure questions of law.
d)

Up to when may Drew appeal the RTC's
decision, to what court shall he take his
appeal, and how shall he take his appeal?
Explain.

e)

Assume that on 14 April 2009 Drew filed a
motion for reconsideration and the same
was denied by the RTC. Drew received a
copy of the order of denial on 1 July 2009.
Up to when may Drew appeal? Explain.

599

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
a) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, Drew
may appeal to the RTC within 15 days from
promulgation of the judgment or up to 16 April
2008 by filing a notice of appeal with the MeTC
and serving a copy thereof upon the adverse
party. [S2 & 6 R122]
b) Drew may appeal up to 2 June 2008.
The Supreme Court has held that the fresh 15day period provided for in Neypes v. Court of
Appeals (G.R. No. 141524, 15 September 2005)
applies to appeals in criminal cases, notwithstanding
the wordings of S6 R122. The Supreme Court said
it would be absurd for an appellant in a civil case to
have a better right of appeal than the accused in a
criminal case. (Yu v. Samson-Tatad, G.R. 170979,
9 February 2011 ).
c)

No, my answer would not be the same. Drew
can no longer appeal.

Under the Rule on Summary Procedure, a
motion for reconsideration of a judgment is a
prohibited pleading. Cases for violation of B.P. Big. 22
are covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure.
Here the motion for reconsideration is a
prohibited pleading and did not suspend the
running of the reglementary period to appeal.
Hence the judgment became final and executory on
17 April 2008.
d)

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, Drew
may appeal the RTC's decision to the Court of
Appeals within 15 days from notice of judgment
or until 16 April 2009 by filing a petition for

600

J9JC9B0M

Rule 122
Appeal

review under Rule 42 and serving a copy
thereof upon the adverse party. Rule 42 applies
since the RTC's decision was rendered in the
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction.
The Supreme Court has held that even if the
appeal from a RTC decision is on pure question of
law, the appeal must be taken to the Court of
Appeals and not to the Supreme Court pursuant to
the Rules of Criminal Procedure. (Tan v. People,
381 SCRA 75; S2[b] R122).
e) Drew may appeal up to 16 July 2009.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
appeal to the Court of Appeals in cases decided by
the RTC in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
shall be by petition for review under Rule 42.
Under Rule 42, the petition may be filed within 15
days from notice of the decision or of the denial of
the motion for reconsideration.
Here Drew received notice of the denial of his
motion for reconsiderationon 1 July 2009. Hence he
may file the petitionfor review up to 16 July 2009.

601

J9JC9B0M

RULE124. PROCEDUREIN
THE COURT OF APPEALS
Q.

When should the appellant's brief be filed?

A.

Within 30 days from receipt by the appellant or his
counsel of the notice from the clerk of court of the
Court of Appeals that the evidence is already
attached to the record, the appellant shall file 7
copies of his brief with the clerk of court which shall
be accompanied by proof of service of 2 copies
thereof upon the appellee. (83 R124).

Q.

What are the grounds for dismissal of appeal by
the CA?

A.

The CA may, upon motion of the appellee or motu
proprio and with notice to the appellant in either
case, dismiss the appeal on the following grounds:
(BENA sec OAP)
(a)

Appellant fails to file his brief within the
prescribed time, except where the appellant is
represented by a counsel de oficio.

(b)

Appellant escapes from prison or confinement,
jumps bail, or flees to a foreign country during
the pendency of the appeal. (88 R 124 ).

(c)

Failure to file the notice of appeal within the
prescribed period.

(d)

Failure to pay the docket or other lawful fees.

(e)

Failure of the appellant to serve and file the
required number of copies of his brief
or memorandum within the time provided by
the Rules.

602

J9JC9B0M

Rule 124
Procedure In The Court Of Appeals

(f) Absence of specific assignment of errors in the
appellant's brief, or of page references to the
record.
(g) Failure of the appellant to take the necessary
steps for the correction or completion of the
record within the time limited by the court in
its order.
(h) Failure of the appellant to comply with orders,
circulars, or directives of the court without
justifiable cause.
(i) The fact that the order or judgment appealed
from is not appealable. (81 R50; 818 R124).
Q.

That rules in civil procedure may be applied to
criminal cases?

A.

The provisions of Rules 42, 44 to 46 and 48 to 56
relating to procedure in the Court of Appeals and in
the Supreme Court in original and appealed civil
cases shall be applied to criminal cases insfofar as
they are applicable and not inconsistent with the
provisions of R 124.

Q.

Is Rule 47 applicable to criminal cases?

A.

No. 81 R47 limits the scope of the remedy of
annulment of judgment to civil actions. The remedy
cannot be resorted to when the RTC judgment being
questioned was rendered in a criminal case. The
2000 Revised Rules of CriminalProcedureitself does
not permitsuch recourse,for it excludedR47 from the
enumeration in S 18 R 124 of the provisions of the
1997 Rules Of Civil Procedurewhich have suppletory
application.to criminal cases. (People v. Bitanga, 26
June 2007).
603

J9JC9B0M

RULE 126. SEARCH AND SEIZURE
Q.

What is a search warrant?

A.

A search warrant is an order in writing issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a
judge and directed to a peace officer, commanding
him to search for personal property described
therein and bring it before the court. (81 R126).

Q.

May a justice of a collegial court issue a search
warrant?

A.

No. The power to issue search warrants is
exclusively vested with trial judges in the exercise of
their judicial functions. (Manly Sportswear Mfg. Inc.
v. Dadodette Enterprises, G.R. No. 165306, 20
September 2005; citing Sec. 2, Art. Ill, Constitution).

Q.

What is the nature of a search warrant?

A.

A search warrant proceeding is in no sense a
criminal action or the commencement
of a
prosecution. The proceeding is not one against
any person, but is solely for the discovery and to
get possession of personal property. It however
has no relation to a civil process. It concerns the
public at large as distinguished from the ordinary
civil action involving the rights of private persons. !1
may only be applied for in the furtherance of
public prosecution. (United Laboratories, Inc. v.
Isip, G.R. No. 163858, 28 June 2005). However a
private individual or a private corporation
complaining to the NBI or to a government agency
charged with the enforcement of special penal
laws, such as the BFAD, may appear, participate
and file pleadings in the search warrant
604

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

proceedings to maintain, inter alia, the validity of
a search warrant issued by the court and the
admissibility of properties seized in anticipation of
a criminal case to be filed; such private party may
do so in collaboration with the NBI or such
government agency. (Id.)
Q.

The police filed with the Regional Trial Court an
application for search warrant for theft following
the complaint of PLDTthat respondents(officers
and employeesof World Wide Web Corporation)
were using the facility of PLDT in order to
redirect long-distance calls to respondents'
customersto the damageand prejudiceof PLDT.
The trial court issued the search warrants
but on a motion to quash, the trial court later
quashed the search warrants for being general
warrants. PLDTfiled a motion for reconsideration
but this was denied by the trial court on the
ground that PLDT did not get the conformity of
the public prosecutor as required by 55 R110.
PLDT appealed the order quashing the search
warrants to the Court of Appeals.
a) Does PLDT have the personality to challenge
the quashal of the search warrants?
b) Is appeal or a special civil action for
certiorari the proper mode to challenge the
order quashing the search warrants?

A.

a) Yes, PLOT has the legal personality to file
appeals from the orders quashing the search
warrant. The petition filed by PLOT before this
Court does not involve an ordinary criminal
605

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

action which requires the participation and
conformity of the City Prosecutor or the Solicitor
General when raised before appellate courts.
On the contrary, what is involved here is a
search warrant proceeding which is not a
criminal action, much less a civil action, but a
special criminal process. (HPS Software v.
PLOT, 10 December 2012; Worldwide Web
Corp. v. People, 13 January 2014).
b) Appeal is the appropriate mode. Where a
search warrant is applied for and issued in
anticipation of a criminal case yet to be filed, the
order quashing the warrant ends the judicial
process. Hence the remedy from such an order
is appeal and not certiorari. (Worldwide Web
Corp. v. People, 13 January 2014).
Q.

Respondent Presiding Judge issued a search
warrant against the petitioner upon the
application of the NBI on the basis of his
finding of probable cause for a violation of
Section 2(b) of B.P. Big. 33 for hoarding large
quantities of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in
steel cylinders belonging to respondentPryce
Gases, Inc. (Pryce Gases).The application for
the search warrant was filed at the instance of
Pryce Gases through its letter to the NBI. The
petitioner filed a motion to quash the search
warrant, raising therein, inter alia, the lack of
probable cause and failure to specify the single
offense committed. The RespondentPresiding
Judge denied the petitioner's motion to quash.
The Petitionerthen filed a special civil action for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals. The CA
dismissed the petition on the ground that the
People of the Philippines was not impleaded
606

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

and no copy of the petition was served on the
OSG. The Petitioner filed a motion for
reconsideration arguing that it was premature
to implead the People of the Philippines as
respondents becauseno criminal case had yet
been filed against him with only the application
for the issuance of the search warrant having
been made; and that serving the copy of the
petition on the OSGpursuant to 53 R46was not
indispensable.Nevertheless,he attached to his
motion for reconsideration the affidavit of
service attesting that the copy of the petition
and the motion for reconsiderationwere served
on the OSG by registered mail. The CA denied
the petitioner's motion for reconsideration on
the ground that although the petitioner had
served on the OSG copies of the petition and
the motion for reconsideration he did not
amend the petition in order to implead the
Peopleof the Philippinesas respondents.
a) Was the Petitioner correct in arguing that
that his petition for certiorari did not needto
implead the People of the Philippines
because there was yet no criminal case
commencedin court?
b) Did the CA act properly in dismissing the
petition for certiorari?
A.

a) No. lmpleading the People of the Philippines in
the petition for certiorari did not depend on
whether or not an actual criminal action had
already been commenced in court against the
petitioner. It cannot be denied that the search

607

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

warrant in question had been issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, and
that fact rendered the People of the Philippines
indispensable parties in the special civil action
for certiorari brought to nullify the questioned
orders of respondent Presiding Judge. The
impleading is further expressly demanded in 83
R46. Every search warrant is applied for and
issued by and under the authority of the State,
regardless of who initiates its application or
causes its issuance.
b) Yes. The petitioner could have quickly rectified
his omission by the immediate amendment of
the petition. However, although made aware of
the omission as a fatal defect, he did not cause
the amendment but continued to ignore the
need to amend. He thereby exhibited his
adamant refusal to recognize the People of the
Philippines as indispensable parties, which
impelled the CA to dismiss the petition. (Te v.
Breva, 5 August 2015, Bersamin, J.)
Q.

Distinguish a search warrant from a warrant
of arrest.

A.

A search warrant is for the seizure of personal
property while a warrant of arrest is for the seizure
of a person.
A search warrant may issue even if there is no
criminal case filed in court while a warrant of arrest
may issue only in connection with a criminal case
filed in court.

608

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

Q.

Where shall an application for a search warrant
be filed?

A.

An application for search warrant shall be filed with
the following: (TReP)
a)

Any court within whose territorial jurisdiction a
crime was committed.

b)

For compelling reasons stated in the
application, any court within the judicial region
where the crime was committed if the place of
the crime's commission is known, or any court
within the judicial region where the warrant shall
be enforced.

c) However if the criminal action has already been
filed, the application shall be made only in
the court where the criminal action is pending.
(S2 R126).
Q.

Atty. Dalmacio, the Director of the National
Bureau of Investigation, applied for a search
warrant before the Executive Judge of RTC
Manila. He alleged in his application that a
certain alias Django was keeping about 10 kilos
of shabu in a wooden cabinet located at
Dillian's Store in Paseo de Sta. Rosa, Laguna.
The Executive Judge of Manila personally
examinedAtty. Dalmacioand his witnesses and
thereafter issued the search warrant particularly
describing the place to be searched and the
items to be seized.
Can the search (a) warrant issued by the
Executive Judge of Manila and enforced
in Laguna?

609

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Can the legal (b) concept of "venue is
jurisdictional" be validly raised in applications
for search warrants? (18 Bar Q15).
A.
a)

Yes. Applications for search warrants involving
dangerous drugs, heinous crimes, illegal
gambling, and illegal possession of firearms
(DH GF) may be filed with Executive Judge and
Vice Executive Judge of the RTCs of Manila &
QC by PNP, NBI, PAOC-TF (Presidential AntiOrganized Crime Task Force), & REACT-TF
(Reaction against Crimes Task Force). The
search warrant is enforceable outside territorial
jurisdiction of Manila & QC. The application
shall be personally endorsed by the heads of
said agencies. (A.M. No. 99-20-09-SC, 25
January 2000).

b)

No. An application for a search warrant is not a
criminal action but a special criminal process.
Hence the place where the application is to be
filed is governed by Supreme Court rules and
issuances and not by statute.

Q.

A search warrant was issued by the RTC of
Manila. May the search warrant be enforced in
Davao City?

A.

Yes. Section 3 of the Interim Rules provides that
specified writs issued by a RTC are enforceable
only within its judicial region.

3. Writs and processes. - (a) Writs of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, quo
warranto, habeas corpus and injunction [CPM

610

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

HQI] issued by a regional trial court may be
enforced in any part of the region.
(b) All other processes, whether issued by a
regional trial court or a metropolitan trial court,
municipal trial court or municipal circuit trial
court may be served anywhere in the
Philippines, and, in the last three cases,
without a certification by the judge of the
regional trial court. [Emphasis supplied]
A search warrant is not among the specified
writs under Sec. 3(a) which are enforceable only
within the judicial region. It falls under Sec. 3(b)
since it is a judicial process. Hence it is enforceable
anywhere in the Philippines. (Malaloan v. Court of
Appeals, 232 SCRA 249, 264 [19941).
Q.

Where shall an application for a cybercrime
warrant be filed?

A.

An application for a cybercrime warrant concerning a
violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses) and/or
Section 5 (Other Offenses), Chapter II of RA 10175
(Cybercrime Prevention Act) shall be filed by the law
enforcement authorities before any of the designated
cybercrime courts of the province or the city where
the offense or any of its elements has been
committed, is being committed, or is about to be
committed, or where any part of the computer
system used is situated, or where any of the damage
caused to a natural or juridical person took place.
However, the cybercrime courts in Quezon
City, the City of Manila, Makati City, Pasig City,
Cebu City, lloilo City, Davao City and Cagayan De
Oro City shall have the special authority to act on
applications and issue warrants which shall be
611

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

enforceable nationwide and outside the Philippines.
(Sec. 2.2, Rule on Cybercrime Warrants).97
On the other hand, an application for a warrant
under this Rule for violation of Section 6, Chapter II
of RA 10175 ( all crimes defined and penalized by
the Revised Penal Code, as amended, and other
special laws, if committed by, through, and with the
use of ICT) shall be filed by the law enforcement
authorities with the regular or other specialized
regional trial courts, as the case may be, in the
province or city where the offense or any of its
elements has been committed, is being committed,
or is about to be committed, or where any part of
the computer system used is situated, or where any
of the damage caused to a natural or juridical
person took place. (Id.).
Q.

State the constitutional provision on search
warrant.

A.

The right of the people to be secure in their
persons, houses, papers, and effects against
unreasonable searches and seizures of whatever
nature and for any purpose shall be inviolable, and
no search warrant shall issue except upon probable
cause to be determined personally by the judge
after examination under oath or affirmation of the
complainant and the witnesses he may produce,
and particularly describing the place to be searched

97Section
2.2 of the Rule on Cybercrime Warrants gives the impression
that cybercrime warrants issued by cybercrime courts other than those of
Quezon City, etc., may be enforced only within their judicial regions. It is opined
that this is not the intention of the rule since search and other judical warrants are
enforceable nationwide. (Malaloan v. Court of Appeals, 232 SCRA 249). The
intent of the rule appears to be that an application for cybercrime warrant may be
filed in the cybercrime courts of Quezon City, etc., even if the crime did not occur
or none of the elements occurred in Quezon City etc., or even if the computer
system is not situated or the damage was not caused in Quezon City, etc.

612

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

and the persons or things to be seized.
Art. Ill, Constitution).

(Sec. 2,

Q.

What are the requisites for the issuance of a
search warrant? (P POP)

A.

The requisites for the issuance of a search warrant
are:
(a) There must be probable cause.
(b) The probable cause must be determined
personally by the judge after examination
under oath or affirmation of the complainant
and the witnesses he may produce.
(c) The search warrant must particularly describe
the place to be searched and the things to
be seized.
(d) The search warrant shall issue in connection
with one specific offense only. (S4 R126).

Q.

How shall the judge make the
determination of probable cause?

A.

The judge must before issuing the warrant
personally examine in the form of searching
questions and answers, in writing and under oath,
the complainant and the witnesses he may produce
on facts personally known to them and attach to the
record their sworn statements, together with the
affidavits submitted. (S5 R126). (SOWPA)

Q.

May hearsay statements of the complainant
and/or witnesses be the basis for the issuance
of a search warrant?

A.

No, since the rules require that the complainant and
the witnesses be examined on facts personally
613

personal

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

known to them. When the law speaks of facts, the
reference is to facts, data, or information personally
known to the applicant and the witnesses he may
present. Absent the element of personal knowledge
by the applicant or his witnesses of the facts upon
which the issuance of a search warrant may be
justified, the warrant is deemed not based on
probable cause and is a nullity.
While hearsay information or tips from
confidential informants could very well serve as
basis for the issuance of a search warrant, the same
is only true if such information or tip was followed-up
personally by the recipient and validated. (People v.
Maderazo, 10 December 2018, Peralta, J.).
Q.

Convicted by the trial court of possession of
shabu, the accused Ogayon for the first time on
appeal in the Court of Appeals argued that the
search warrant was null and void since there was
nothing in the records or evidence to show that
the judge undertook a searching personal
examination in writing and under oath of the
complainant and the witnesses. The Court of
Appeals ruled however that the accused waived
the objection to the nullity of the search warrant
when he failed to raise it before the trial court,
invoking 514 R126.Was the CA's ruling correct?

A.

No. The requirement to raise objections against
search warrants during trial is a procedural rule
established by jurisprudence.
Compliance or
noncompliance with this requirement cannot in any
way diminish the constitutional guarantee that a
search warrant should be issued upon a finding of
probable cause. Ogayon's failure to make a timely
objection cannot serve to cure the inherent defect

614

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

of the warrant. To uphold the validity of the void
warrant would be to disregard one of the most
fundamental rights guaranteed in our Constitution.
In the light of the nullity of the search warrant, the
search conducted on its authority is likewise null
and void. Under the Constitution, any evidence
obtained in violation of a person's right against
unreasonable searches and seizures shall be
inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding.
Ogayon should be acquitted. (Ogayon v. People, 2
September 2015, Brion, J.).
Q.

In order to determine whether the search warrant
particularly describes the place to be searched
and the things to be seized, may the application
for search warrant and its supporting documents
which were incorporated by reference to the
search warrant be taken into consideration?

A.

Yes. Here the application for search warrant and its
supporting documents were incorporated
by
reference or physically attached to the search
warrant to enable the warrant officer to identify the
specific clothes to be searched. (Dimal v. People,
18 April 2018, Peralta, J. ).

Q.

What are the personal property which may be
seized under the warrant?

A.

A search warrant may be issued for the search and
seizure of personal property: (PUS)
(a)

Subject of the offense.

(b)

Stolen or embezzled and other proceeds or
fruits of the offense.

(c)

Used or intended to be used as the means of
committing the offense. (S3 R126).
615

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Petitioner contends that human skeletons or
remains may not be the subject of a search
warrant since these are not personal property.
Is this contention correct?

A.

No. "Personal property" in the context of S3 R126
refers to the thing's mobility, and not to its capacity to
be owned or alienated by a particular person. Article
416 of the Civil Code states that in general, all things
which can be transported from place to place are
deemed to be personal property. Considering that
human remains can generally be transported from
place to place and considering further that they
qualify under the phrase "subject of the offense" given
that they prove the crime's corpus delicti, it follows
that they may be valid subjects of a search warrant.
(Laud v. People, 741 SCRA 239 [2014]).

Q.

In whose presence shall the search of a house,
room, or other premises be made?

A.

No search of a house, room, or any other premises
shall be made except in the presence of the lawful
occupant thereof or any member of his family or in
the absence of the latter, two witnesses of
sufficient age and discretion residing in the same
locality. (S8 R126). (OFW)
It must be stressed that it is only upon the
absence of the lawful occupant or any member of
his family that their presence may be replaced by 2
witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing
in the same locality. A violation of S8 R126 makes
the search unreasonable and renders any evidence
seized by virtue thereof inadmissible pursuant to
the exclusionary rule. (Bulauitan v. People, 19
September 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
616

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

Q.

Police operativesof the Western Police District,
Philippine National Police, applied for a search
warrant in the Regional Trial Court for the
search of the house of Juan Santos and the
seizure of an undetermined amount of shabu.
The team arrived at the house of Santos but
failed to find him there. Insteadthe team found
RobertoCo.
The team conducted a search in the house
of Santos in the presence of Roberto Co and
barangay officials and found ten grams of
shabu. Roberto Co was charged in court with
illegal possession of ten grams of shabu.
Before his arraignment, Roberto Co filed a
motion to quash the search warrant on the
following grounds: (a) he was not the accused
named in the search warrant; and (b) the
warrant does not describe the article to be
seized with sufficient particularity. Resolve the
motion with reasons. (05 Bar Q14).

A.

The motion to quash the search warrant should be
denied.
a) The ground that Roberto Co was not
the accused named in the search warrant is
without merit.
The Supreme Court has held that that where
the search warrant is issued for the search of
specifically described premises only and not for the
search of a person, the failure to name the owner
or occupant of such property in the affidavit and
search warrant does not invalidate the warrant.

617

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

While Co may not have been the person
subject of the search, the fact that he was caught in
flagrante delicto necessitated his valid warrantless
arrest. Therefore, the fact that his name was not
indicated in the search warrant is immaterial.
[Que/nan v. People, 526 SCRA 653, G.R. No.
166061 July 6, 2007]
b) The ground that the warrant does not describe
the article to be seized with sufficient
particularity is without merit.
The Supreme Court has held that the
description "an undetermined amount of" a specific
drug satisfies the requirement of particularity in the
description of the thing to be seized. To require that
the warrant specify beforehand the amount of the
drug to be seized would be require something
which is virtually impossible. [People v. Tee, 395
SCRA 419].
Q.

When the police searched the bedroom of
accused spouses, the latter were not present as
they were in the sala of the house. The police
found marijuana in the bedroom. During the trial,
the accused did not object to the admissibilityof
the marijuana seized but only raised it in their
motion for reconsideration of the judgment of
conviction. May the seized marijuana be used in
evidence against the accused?

A.

No, since the marijuana was the product of an
illegal search. The police did not comply with S8
R126 requiring the presence of the lawful occupant
in the search of a room. The inadmissibility of the
evidence obtained was not defeated by the fact that
accused failed to timely object to such evidence's
618

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure
admissibility during trial. This is because the right
against
unlawful search
is a fundamental
constitutional right. (Oabon v. People, 22 January
2018, Tijam, J.).
Q.

What is the period of validityor effectivityof a
search warrant?

A.

A search warrant shall be valid for 10 days from its
date. Thereafter it shall be void. (810 R126).
A cybercrime warrant shall only be effective for
the length of time as determined by the court, which
shall not exceed a period of 10 days from its
issuance. The court issuing the warrant may, upon
motion, extend its effectivity based only on
justifiable reasons for a period not exceeding 10
days from the expiration of the original period.
(Rule on Cybercrime Warrants).

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that a
search or seizure must be authorized by a
warrant?

A.

The following are the exceptions wherein a
warrantless search may be validly made: (CPA
SCAM)
1) SEARCH
INCIDENTAL
TO
LAWFUL
ARREST. A person lawfully arrested may be
searched for dangerous weapons or anything which
may have been used or constitute proof in the
commission of an offense without a search warrant.
(813 R126). The scope thereof should be limited to
the area within which the arrestee can reach for a
weapon or for evidence in order to destroy it.
(Chime/ v. California, 395 U.S. 752).

619

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

2) CONSENT OR WAIVER. If the person
searched consented to the warrantless search, then
the same is valid. However silence or implied
acquiescence is not considered as a consent to a
warrantless search. The right against a warrantless
search may be waived but the waiver must be
clear and unequivocal, that is, no room for doubt
must be left.
3) SEARCH OF MOVING VEHICLE. The
guaranty of freedom from unreasonable searches
and seizures is construed as recognizing a
necessary difference between a search of a
dwelling house or other stationary structure in
respect of which a search warrant may readily be
obtained and a search of a moving vehicle where it
is not practicable to secure a warrant because the
vehicle can be quickly moved out of the locality or
jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought.
(Caroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132).
4) CHECK POINTS. "Stop and search"
without warrant at military or police checkpoints
have been declared valid so long as it is required
by the exigencies of public order and conducted in
the /east intrusive manner to motorists. ( Valmonte
v. de Villa, 178 SCRA 211 ).
A checkpoint search may either be a mere
routine inspection or it may involve an extensive
search. For a mere routine inspection, the search is
normally permissible when it is limited to a mere
visual search, where the occupants are not
subjected to a physical or body search. On the other
hand, when the vehicle is stopped and subjected to
an extensive search, it would be constitutionally
permissible only if the officers conducting the search

620

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure
had probable cause to believe before the search that
either the motorist is a law offender or they will find
the instrumentality or evidence pertaining to a crime
in the vehicle to be searched. (ANTONIO B.
NACHURA, OUTLINE REVIEWER IN POLITICAL
LAW 130 [2006], citing cases).
5) BODY CHECKS IN AIRPORTS.
Search
made pursuant to routine airport security procedure,
which is allowed under Section 9 of Republic Act
No. 6235, constitutes another exception to the
proscription against warrantless searches and
seizures. R.A. No. 6235 authorizes search for
prohibited materials or substances. "To limit the
action of the airport security personnel to simply
refusing her entry into the aircraft and sending her
home (as suggested by appellant), and thereby
depriving them of 'the ability and facility to act
accordingly, including to further search without
warrant, in light of such circumstances, would be to
sanction impotence and ineffectivity in law
enforcement, to the detriment of society.' Thus, the
strip search in the ladies' room was justified under
the circumstances." (People v. Canton, G.R. No.
148825, 27 December 2002).
6) PLAIN VIEW EXCEPTION. Objects falling
in plain view are subject to seizure and may be
introduced in evidence. (Harris v. United States,
390 U.S. 234).
7) STOP AND FRISK. "Stop and frisk" also
known as a "Terry search" is the right of a police
officer to stop a citizen on the street, interrogate
him and pat him for weapons and contraband
whenever he observes unusual conduct which
leads him to conclude that criminal activity may be

621

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

afoot. (Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 ). The police officer
must have a genuine reason, in accordance with
his experience and the surrounding conditions, to
warrant the belief that the person to be searched
has weapons or contraband concealed about him.
(People v. Sy Chua, G.R. Nos. 136066-67, 4
February 2003).
Q.

Police officers received a text message that a
Marvin Buya would be transporting marijuana.
They put up a check-point. A jeepney was
stopped and the driver signaled to the policeman
two passengers who were carrying marijuana.
Accused Victor Cogaed, one of the indicated
passengers, was asked to open his bag and
when he did, marijuana was found inside. May
the marijuana be admitted in evidence against
the accused?

A.

No, since there was no valid search. The case
would not come under the "stop-and-frisk"
exception to the search warrant requirement. A
basic criterion of this exception would be that the
police officer, with his or her personal knowledge,
must observe the facts leading to the suspicion of
an illicit act. It is the police officer who should
observe facts that would lead to a reasonable
degree of suspicion of a person. The police officer
should not adopt the suspicion initiated by another
person. This is necessary to justify that the person
suspected be stopped and reasonably searched.
Anything less than this would be an infringement
upon one's basic right to security of one's person
and effects.

622

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

,

Here Cogaed was simply a passenger carrying
a bag and traveling aboard a jeepney. There was
nothing suspicious, moreover, criminal, about riding
a jeepney or carrying a bag. The assessment of
suspicion was not made by the police officer but by
the jeepney driver. It was the driver who signalled
to the police that Cogaed was "suspicious."
The fact that Cogaed was the one who opened
his bag would not amount to a waiver of the
Constitutional right against unlawful search. The
waiver must be clear and unequivocal. Here the
act of opening the bag was brought about by the
directive of the police officer, a person in authority
and an intimidating figure. (People v. Cogaed, 30
July 2014).

Q.

In the morning of 17 March 2010, Police Chief
Inspector Randolph Beniat (Chief Inspector
Beniat) received information from a police asset
that Manibogwas standing outside the Municipal
Tourism Office of Dingras, llocos Norte with a
gun tucked in his waistband. To verify this
information, Chief Inspector Beniat immediately
organized a team. Together, they proceeded to
the Municipal Tourism Office located around 20
metersfrom the police station.
About five to eight meters away from the
Municipal Tourism Office, Chief Inspector
Beniat saw Manibog standing outside the
building. The team slowly approached him for
fear that he might fight back. As he moved
closer, Chief Inspector Beniat saw a bulge on
Manibog's waist, which the police officer
deduced to be a gun due to its distinct contour.

623

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Chief Inspector Beniat went up to Manibog,
patted the bulging object on his waist, and
confirmed that there was a gun tucked in
Manibog's waistband. He disarmed Manibog of
the .45 caliber handgun inside a holster, after
which he arrested him for violating the election
gun ban and brought him to the police station
for an inquest proceeding. Was there a valid
warrantless search of Manibog?
A.

Yes. The tip on Manibog, coupled with the police
officers' visual confirmation that Manibog had a
gun-shaped object tucked in his waistband, led to a
reasonable suspicion that he was carrying a gun
during an election gun ban. However, a reasonable
suspicion is not synonymous with the personal
knowledge required under Section 5(a) and (b)
R 113 to effect a valid warrantless arrest. Thus, the
Court of Appeals erred in ruling that the search
conducted on Manibog fell under the established
exception of a warrantless search incidental to a
lawful arrest.
Nonetheless, the combination of the police
asset's tip and the arresting officers' observation of
a gun-shaped object under Manibog's shirt already
suffices as a genuine reason for the arresting
officers to conduct a stop and frisk search on
Manibog. Hence, the trial court correctly upheld the
reasonableness of the warrantless search on
Manibog. (Manibog v. People, 20 March 2019,
Leonen, J.).

Q.

On February 1, 2011, the police officers of
Ocampo, Camarines Sur supposedly received a
report that there was a suspicious person with
something tucked in his waist. The Chief of

624

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

Police of the Ocampo Police Station, Police
Inspector Villamer dispatched a team to verify
the report.
The report eventually resulted in the arrest of
Marvin along me highway of Barangay San
Francisco, Ocampo, Camarines Sur, for the illegal
possession of firearm. He was, thereafter,
subjected to a search of his body and of the bag
allegedly found in his possession. Inside the bag,
the arresting officer found an assortment of
documents, including photocopies of the official
receipt (OR) and certificate of registration (CR) of a
stolen motorcycle. Was there a valid stop-andfrisk of Marvin which would justify the warrantless
search on him?
A.

No. In order to be consideredvalid, a stop and frisk
search must be premised on the manifest overt acts
of an accused, which give law enforcers a "genuine
reason" to conduct the search. Jurisprudence has
refinedthe standard to less than probablecause, but
more than mere suspicion. The search cannot be
based on a suspicion or a hunch. Their suspicion is
formed on the basis of the law enforcers' prior
experiencewith criminals and their behavior, as well
as the surroundingcircumstancesof the case.
In some cases, the Court has also required
the presence of more than one activity which,
when taken together, gives a reasonable
inference of criminal activity. This is determined
on a case-to-case basis, as when a man with
reddish eyes, walking in a swaying manner,
avoided the police officers approaching him, or
when a person was seen placing a heat-sealed
plastic sachet containing a white substance inside a
625

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

cigarette case. For this particular case, however,
the Court cannot discern any circumstance that
would give SP04 Pequiras a genuine reason to
stop-and-frisk Marvin.
The prosecution stated that Marvin was arrested
and searched because the police received a report
regarding a suspicious person with something tucked
in his waist. But in his testimony, SP04 Pequiras
did not specify the actions or behavior of Marvin,
or the factual circumstances occurring prior to
his arrest and search. He simply stated that
Marvin was arrested due to the anonymous tip.
SP04 Pequiras did not even state how they were
able to identify Marvin as the suspicious person
referred to in the concerned citizen's report.
Evidently, these are not enough to create a
reasonable inference of criminal activity. (Porteria v.
People, 20 March 2019, Reyes, J.).
Q.

A.

Accused was chased and arrested by the police
after he had fired a gun against them.
Recovered from him was a bag containing
marijuana. Convicted of illegal possession of
drugs, he argues that the marijuana could not
be used against him as it was not seized by-
virtue of the plain view doctrine, the same being
contained inside the bag. Was the accused's
contention correct?
No. Under S13 R126 a person lawfully arrested
may be searched for dangerous weapons or for
anything which may be used in evidence without a
search warrant.
Here, the marijuana was found in a black bag
in Calantiao's possession and within his immediate

626



J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure
control. He could have easily taken any weapon
from the bag or dumped it to destroy the evidence
inside it. As the black bag containing the marijuana

was in Calantiao's possession, it was within the
permissible area that the apprehending officers
could validly conduct a warrantless search.
Calantiao's argument that the marijuana
cannot be used as evidence against him because
its discovery was in violation of the Plain View
Doctrine, is misplaced. "The doctrine is usually
applied where a police officer is not searching for
evidence against the accused, but nonetheless
inadvertently comes across an incriminating object
xx x. [It] serves to supplement the prior justification
- whether it be a warrant for another object, hot
pursuit, search incident to lawful arrest, or some
other legitimate reason for being present
unconnected with a search directed against the
accused - and permits the warrantless seizure."
The Plain View Doctrine thus finds no
applicability in Calantiao's situation because the
police officers purposely searched him upon his
arrest. The police officers did not inadvertentlycome
across the black bag, which was in Calantiao's
possession; they deliberately opened it, as part of
the search incident to Calantiao's lawful arrest.
(People v. Calantiao, 18 June 2014, Leonardo-De
Castro, J.)
Q.

At around 7 am of 10 September 2015 in Purok
2, Barangay San Juan, Gingoog City, Alfredo
Salucana (Salucana) went to the Gingoog City
Police Station to report a mauling incident
where Acosta purportedly hit him with a piece
of wood. He also reported that Acosta was

627

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

illegally planting marijuana.Salucana'sforegoing
reports prompted the police officers to proceed
to Acosta's home in Purok 2, Barangay San
Juan, Gingoog City. Thereat,Salucanapositively
identified Acosta who was then walking on the
trail leading towards his house. The police
officers then rushed towards Acosta and
arrested him before he entered his home. After
the arrest, the police found 13 hills of suspected
marijuana plants planted beneath the "gabi"
plants just outside Acosta's home, and around
a meter away from where he was arrested.
During the trial, the prosecution argued that the
warrantless seizure of the marijuana plants was
justified under the Plain View Doctrine. Is the
prosecution's argumentcorrect?
A.

No. Plain-view exception to search warrant applies
only if discovery was inadvertent. The testimonies of
the police officers collectively paint the picture that
they proceeded with the arrest of Acosta for the
mauling incident armed with prior knowledge that he
was also illegally planting marijuana. Hence the
discovery of the marijuana was not inadvertent.
(People v. Acosta, 28 Jan 2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

Q.

The police conducted a surveillance operation
against the suspects. A certain Mallari who
accompaniedthe police approachedthe subject
house and then went to the police officers and
told them that drugs were being used in the
accused's house. The police went inside the
house and saw several persons using drugs.
They arrested these person and the accused,
and also seized the drugs found. The
prosecution justified the warrantless seizure of
the drugs under the Plain View Doctrine.
628

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

However Mallari was not presented in court as a
witness. Was the Plain View Doctrine applicable
in this case?

A.

No. The "plain view" doctrine applies when the
following requisites concur: (a) the law enforcement
officer in search of the evidence has a prior
justification for an intrusion or is in a position from
which he can view a particular area; (b) the
discovery of evidence in plain view is inadvertent;
(c) it is immediately apparent to the officer that the
item he observes may be evidence of a crime,
contraband or otherwise subject to seizure. The law
enforcement officer must lawfully make an initial
intrusion or properly be in a position from which he
can particularly view the area. In the course of such
lawful intrusion, he inadvertently comes across a
piece of evidence incriminating the accused. The
object must be open to eye and hand and its
discovery inadvertent.
Here, it was a certain Mallari who saw that drugs
were being used inside accused's house during the
surveillance operation. However, Mallari was never
presented as a witness. His rank as a police officer
and his assigned role during the alleged surveillance
operation were not provided by the prosecution.
Thus, it could not be determined from the records
whether the requisites of the plain view search were
complied with against accused's alleged crime of
maintenance of a drug den. The validity of the plain
view search is crucial since it will determine whether
the police officers conducted a valid warrantless
search and arrest against accused and his house.
The prosecution did not give any justification for its
failure to present Mallari as a witness. (People v.
Carino, 25 March 2019, Gesmundo, J.).
629

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Police received a tip that a certain "Baho" who
was later identified as Veridiano was on the way
to San Pablo City to procure illegal drugs. The
police set up a check-point in Nagcarlan,
Laguna. The police officers at the check-point
personally knew Veridiano. They allowed some
vehicles to pass through after checking that he
was not on board. At around 10:00 a.m., they
chanced upon Veridiano inside a passenger
jeepney coming from San Pablo, Laguna.They
flagged down the jeepney and asked the
passengers to disembark. The police officers
instructed the passengersto raise their t-shirts
to check for possible concealed weapons and
to remove the contents of their pockets.The
police recovered from Veridiano a tea bag
containing marijuana.May the marijuanaseized
be used in evidenceagainst Veridiano?

A.

No. There was no valid warrantless arrest since
Veridiano was not committing a crime when he was
arrested. The search at the check-point was not
valid. Such a search must be limited to a visual
search and not be an extensive search of the
vehicle or a body search of the occupant.
(Veridiano v. People, 7 June 2017, Leanen, J.).

Q.

After a lawful warrantless arrest based on SS(b)
R113, the police conducted an initial cursory
body search on the accused which yielded only
personal belongings of the accused. The police
then brought the accused to the police station
where they conducted a more thorough search
on the accused which yielded nine plastic
sachets of shabu. May the shabu be used in
evidence against the accused?
630

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

A.

No. Case law requires a strict application of this rule,
that is, "to absolutely limit a warrantless search of a
person who is lawfully arrested to his or her person
at the time of and incident to his or her arrest and to
dangerous weapons or anything which may be used
as proof of the commission of the offense." Such
warrantless search obviously cannot be made in a
place other than the place of arrest.
The first search made on accused, i.e., the
cursory body search which, however, did not yield
any drugs but only personal belongings of
petitioners, may be considered as a search
incidental to a lawful arrest as it was done
contemporaneous to their arrest and at the place of
apprehension. On the other hand, the same cannot
be said of the second search which yielded the
drugs subject of this case, considering that a
substantial amount of time had already elapsed
from the time of the arrest to the time of the second
search, not to mention the fact that the second
search was conducted at a venue other than the
place of actual arrest, i.e., at the Police Station.
The second search made on accused at the
Panabo Police Station is unlawful and unreasonable.
Resultantly, the illegal drugs allegedly recovered
therefrom constitutes inadmissible evidence pursuant
to the exclusionary clause enshrined in the 1987
Constitution. Given that said illegal drugs is the very
corpus delicti of the crime charged, accused must
necessarily be acquitted and exonerated from
criminal liability. (Vaporos v. People, 3 June 2019,
Perlas-Bernabe, J. ).

631

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the guidelines laid down by the
Supreme Court in the conduct of searches of
public transport buses and vehicles (Saluday
guidelines)?

A.

Prior to entry, passengers and their bags and
luggages can be subjected to a routine inspection
akin to airport and seaport security protocol. In this
regard, metal detectors and x-ray scanning
machines can be installed atz bus terminals.
Passengers can also be frisked. In lieu of electronic
scanners, passengers can be required instead to
open their bags and luggages for inspection, which
inspection must be made in the passenger's
presence. Should the passenger object, he or she
can validly be refused entry into the terminal.
While in transit, a bus can still be searched
by government agents or the security personnel of
the bus owner in the following three instances.
First, upon receipt of information that a passenger
carries contraband or illegal articles, the bus where
the passenger is aboard can be stopped en route to
allow for an inspection of the person and his or her
effects. This is no different from an airplane that is
forced to land upon receipt of information about the
contraband or illegal articles carried by a passenger
onboard. Second, whenever a bus picks passengers
en route, the prospective passenger can be frisked
and his or her bag or luggage be subjected to the
same routine inspection by government agents or
private security personnel as though the person
boarded the bus at the terminal. This is because
unlike an airplane, a bus is able to stop and pick
passengers along the way, making it possible for
these passengers to evade the routine search
at the bus terminal. Third, a bus can be flagged

632

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure
down at designated military or police checkpoints
where State agents can board the vehicle for
a routine inspection of the passengers and their
bags or luggages.
In both situations, the inspection of passengers
and their effects prior to entry at the bus terminal
and the search of the bus while in transit must also
satisfy the following conditions to qualify as a valid
reasonable search. First, as to the manner of the
search, it must be the least intrusive and must
uphold the dignity of the person or persons being
searched, minimizing, if not altogether eradicating,
any cause for public embarrassment, humiliation or
ridicule. Second, neither can the search result from
any discriminatory motive such as insidious
profiling, stereotyping and other similar motives. In
all instances, the fundamental rights of vulnerable
identities, persons with disabilities, children and
other similar groups should be protected. Third, as
to the purpose of the search, it must be confined to
ensuring public safety. Fourth, as to the evidence
seized from the reasonable search, courts must be
convinced that precautionary measures were in
place to ensure that no evidence was planted
against the accused.
Aside from public transport buses, any moving
vehicle that similarly accepts passengers at the
terminal and along its route is likewise covered by
these guidelines. Hence, whenever compliant with
these guidelines, a routine inspection at the
terminal or of the vehicle itself while in transit
constitutes a reasonable search. Otherwise, the
intrusion becomes unreasonable, thereby triggering
the constitutional guarantee under Section 2, Article

Ill of the Constitution.
633

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The guidelines do not apply to privately-owned
cars. Neither are they applicable to moving vehicles
dedicated for private or personal use, as in the
case of taxis, which are hired by only one or a
group of passengers such that the vehicle can no
longer be flagged down by any other person unti1
the passengers on board alight from the vehicle.
(Saluday v. People, 3 April 2018, e.b., Carpio, J.).
Q.

What are the remedies against an unlawful
search warrant?

A.

The remedies against an unlawful search warrant are:
(a) A motion to quash the search warrant, and/or
(b) A motion to suppress evidence obtained by the
unlawful search warrant.
If no motion to suppress evidence was filed,
the aggrieved party may still object to the evidence
so obtained when the same is offered, invoking
Sec. 3(2), Article Ill of the Constitution.
While the text of 814 R126 applies only to
cases where a search warrant was issued, albeit
unlawful, it is submitted that 814 R126 should be
extended to all cases of unlawful search and
seizure (whether with warrant or not) as covered in
Sec. 3(2), Article Ill of the Constitution.

Q.

Boy Maton, a neighborhood tough guy, was
arrested by a police officer on suspicionthat he
was keeping prohibited drugs in his clutch bag.
When Boy Maton was searched immediately
after the arrest, the officer found and recovered
10 sachets of shabu neatly tucked in the inner
linings of the clutch bag. At the time of his
arrest, Boy Maton was watching a basketball
634

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

game being played in the town plaza, and he
was cheering for his favorite team. He was
subsequently charged with illegal possession
of dangerous drugs, and he entered a plea of
not guilty when he was arraigned.
During the trial, Boy Maton moved for the
dismissal of the information on the ground that
the facts revealed that he had been illegally
arrested. He further moved for the suppression
of the evidence confiscated from him as being
the consequenceof the illegal arrest, hence,the
fruit of the poisonous tree.
The trial court, in denying the motions of
Boy Maton, explained that at the time the
motions were filed Boy Maton had already
waived the right to raise the issue of the legality
of the arrest. The trial court observed that,
pursuant to the Rules of Court, Boy Maton, as
the accused, should have assailed the validity
of the arrest before entering his plea to the
information. Hence, the trial court opined that
any adverse consequenceof the alleged illegal
arrest had also been equally waived. Comment
on the ruling of the trial court. (17 Bar Q19).
A.

The ruling of the court denying the motion for
dismissal of the information on the ground of illegal
arrest is proper. The ground of illegal arrest was
already waived when Boy Maten entered a plea
without filing a motion to quash on the ground that
the court had no jurisdiction over his person.
(S9R117).

However, the ruling denying the motion to
suppress is not correct. A waiver of an illegal,
635

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

warrantless arrest does not carry with it a waiver of
the inadmissibility of evidence seized during an
illegal warrantless arrest. (People v. Racho, 3 Aug
2010). A waiver of an illegal arrest is not a waiver of
an illegal search. (Villanueva v. People, 17 Nov
2014, Sereno, C.J.). The evidence seized as a
result of the illegal arrest must be suppressed.
Q.

Where shall the motion to quash the search
warrant and/or to suppress evidencebe filed?

A.

It shall be filed in and acted upon only by the court
where the action has been instituted.
If no criminal action has been instituted, the
motion may be filed in and resolved by the court
that issued the search warrant. However if such
court failed to resolve the motion and a criminal
case is later filed in another court, the motion shall
be resolved by the latter court. (S14 R126).

Q.

The NBI applied with the RTCof Makati City for
the issuance of a search warrant covering
documents and articles found at the offices of
Respondents. The NBI alleged that these
documents and articles were being used to (a)
violate the Securities Regulation Code, and (b)
commit estafa under Article 315 of the Revised
Penal Code. The court granted the application.
Subsequently the Respondents filed with
the RTC of Muntinlupa City a petition for
prohibition and injunction seeking to enjoin the
NBI and the SEC from using the seized items in
prosecuting them. Does the RTCof Muntinlupa
have jurisdiction to entertain the petition for
prohibition and injunction?
636

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure
A.

No. The motion to quash a search warrant and to
suppress evidence obtained thereby should be filed
with the issuing court (where the criminal action has
not yet been instituted) pursuant to 814 R126.
Here the petition for prohibition and injunction
that Respondents filed with the Muntinlupa RTC,
which seeks to prohibit the government agencies
from using the items seized under the search
warrant, is actually an action to suppress their use
as evidence. Hence, Mendoza should have filed it
with the Makati RTC which issued such warrant.
(SEC v. Mendoza, 23 April 2012, Abad, J.).

Q.

Describe the procedural device of a motion to
suppress evidence.

A.

Under American procedural law, a motion. to
suppress evidence is a motion, usually a pretrial
one or a motion in limine, the purpose of which is to
prevent the prosecution from using or presenting
during the trial illegally obtained evidence. The
advantage of a motion to suppress is that the
evidence would not go to the jury and would not
have any prejudicial effect against the movant.
Furthermore, if the motion to suppress evidence is
granted, the defense may file a motion to dismiss
the criminal case for lack of probable cause and
thereby avoid the agony and expense of a trial.
Under Philippineevidentiarylaw, the admissibility
of evidence may be assailed by objection only after
it has been offered in evidence. We have however
adopted the motion to suppress evidence with
respect to evidence obtained by virtue of an
unlawful search warrant. (814 R126). Hence the
637

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

evidence may be assailed even before the trial and
even before a criminal case is filed.
Q.

The search warrant authorized the seizure of
"undetermined quantity of shabu." During the
service of the search warrant, the raiding team
also recovered a kilo of dried marijuana leaves
wrapped in newsprint. The accused moved to
suppress the marijuana leaves as evidence for
the violation of Section 11 of the Comprehensive
Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002 since they were
not covered by the search warrant. The State
justfified the seizure of the marijuana leaves
under the "plain view" doctrine. There was no
indication of whether the marijuana leaves were
discovered and seized before or after the
seizure of the shabu. If you are the judge, how
would you rule on the motion to suppress?
(08 Bar Q9).

A.

If I am the judge, I would grant the motion to
suppress.
A search warrant should particularly describe
the things to be seized. (Section 2, Art. Ill,
Constitution; 82 R126). Any evidence obtained in
violation of Section 2, Art. Ill of the Constitution
shall be inadmissible for any purpose in any
proceeding. (Sec. 3[2], Art. Ill, Constitution).
Here the marijuana was not particularly
described or even mentioned in the search warrant.
Hence its seizure was unlawful and it shall be
inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding.
The "plain view" exception would not apply
since the marijuana was not in plain view since
these were wrapped in newsprint.

638

J9JC9B0M

Rule 126
Search And Seizure

Q.

May the question of whether or not there was
abuse in the enforcement of a search warrant
be raised in a motion to quash?

A.

No. In a motion to quash, what should be assailed
is the validity of the warrant's issuance. The
manner of serving the warrant and of effecting the
search are not proper issues in a motion to quash.
The remedies against such abuse are through
appropriate penal, administrative, or civil proceedings.
(Kho v. Makalintal, 306 SCRA 70).

639

J9JC9B0M

RULE 127. PROVISIONAL REMEDIES IN
CRIMINAL CASES
Q.

May provisional remedies be availed of in a
criminal case?

A.

Yes, the provisional remedies in civil actions,
insofar as they are applicable, may be availed of in
connection with the civil action deemed instituted
with the criminal action. (S1 R127). Necessarily it
would be the offended party who may avail of the
same against the accused.

Q.

May the offended party avail of the provisional
remedy of preliminary attachment against the
accused?

A.

Yes. When the civil action is properly instituted in
the criminal action as provided in R111, the
offended party may have the property of the
accused attached as security for the satisfaction of ..
any judgment that may be recovered from the
accused in the following cases: (DEAN)
(a) When the accused is about to abscond from
the Philippines.
(b) When the criminal action is based on a claim
for money or property embezzled
or
fraudulently misapplied or converted to the use
of the accused who is a fiduciary, or for willful
violation of duty.
(c) When the accused has concealed, removed, or
disposed of his property, or is about to do so.

640

J9JC9B0M

Rule 127
Provisional Remedies In Criminal Cases

(d)

When the accused resides outside
Philippines (non-resident). (S2 R127).98

the

Q.

In a BP 22 case, may the private complainant
avail of preliminary attachment on the ground
that the check used to pay a pre-existing
obligation bounced?

A.

It is submitted that the private complainant may do
so, even though fraud as a ground for attachment is
not mentioned in S2 R127. Please refer to the
immediately preceding footnote.

98Note
that the grounds of [1] recovery of property unjustly taken; [2] fraud,
and [3] action against a party on whom summons may be served by publication,
which are found in 81 R57 are not found in 82 R127. It is submitted however that
the offended party in a criminal case can still avail of these grounds insofar as the
civil action for the recovery of civil liability is instituted in the criminal case by virtue
of 81 R127. 81 and 82 R127 are not mutually repugnant and may be reconciled
with each other. It is suggested that 82 be eliminated since 81 R127 in relation to
81 R57 already cover the case of preliminary attachment in criminal cases.

641

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

EVIDENCE

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

RULE 130. RULES OF ADMISSIBILITY
Q.

Define evidence.

A.

Evidence is the means, sanctioned by the Rules of
Court, of ascertaining in a judicial proceeding the
truth respecting a matter of fact. (S1 R128).
Evidence also refers to the medium used to prove
the existence or non-existenceof a fact in issue.

Q.

Are the rules of evidence the same in all courts
and in all trials and hearings?

A.

Yes, except as otherwise provided by law or by the
Rules of Court (S2 R128) or by Supreme Court
issuances.

Q.

How is evidence classified according to its
nature or form?

A.

Evidence is classified according to its nature or form
as follows: (DOT)
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE. Writings or any
material offered as proof of their contents.
OBJECT (OR REAL) EVIDENCE. Evidence
which is directly addressed to the court's senses.
TESTIMONIAL EVIDENCE. Consists of the
statement of a witness offered to the court. Maybe
oral/live or by judicial affidavit.

Q.

How is evidence classified according to its
relation to the fact in issue?

A.

Evidence is classified according to its relation to the
fact in issue as follows:
645

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

DIRECT EVIDENCE. That which proves the
fact in issue without the aid of any inference or
presumption.
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE. That which
proves the fact in issue by way of inference or
presumption.
Q.

Distinguish cumulative evidence from corroborative
evidence.

A.

Cumulative evidence is evidence of the same kind
and to the same state of facts, while corroborative
evidence is additional evidence of a different
character to the same point. (2 REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 435 [6th rev. ed.]).
More often however this fine distinction between
cumulative and corroborative evidence is not
observed in law and in practice and corroborative
evidence is defined or taken to mean as additional
evidence to the same point, whether of the same or
different kind. For instance "corroborative evidence"
in Section 28 of the Rules on Examination of a
Child Witness, which refers to the act or declaration
of a child declarant as an exception to the hearsay
rule, should be interpreted in the broad rather than
in the strict sense.

Q.

Distinguishprima facie evidence from conclusive
evidence.

A.

Prima facie evidence is that which by itself is
sufficient to prove a fact but which may be rebutted
by contrary evidence, while conclusive evidence is
one which may not be rebutted or contradicted.

646

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Distinguish positive evidence from negative
evidence.

A.

Evidence is positive when the witness affirms that a
fact did or did not occur, while negative evidence is
when the witness states he did not see or know of
the occurrence of a fact. (2 REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM436 [61h rev. ed.]).

Q.

When is evidence admissible?

A.

Evidence is admissible when it is relevant to the
issue and is not excluded by the Constitution, the
law, or by the Rules of Court. (83 R128). Or to
illustrate it by way of a formula: ADMISSIBILITY =
RELEVANCY+ COMPETENCY.

Q.

When is evidence relevant?

A.

Evidence is relevant when it has a relation to the
fact in issue as to induce belief in its existence or
non-existence.
In civil cases, a fact in issue is one which was
raised in the pleadings of the parties. In criminal
cases, a fact in issue is one which will establish
whether or not the accused is liable or guilty for the
offense as charged in the information.
Even if a fact tends to prove a matter
determinative of the case but the matter was not
put in issue, evidence of such fact is not admissible
since it is not relevant. In civil cases the proponent
however may avail of 85 R10.

Q.

Distinguishbetween relevant and material evidence.

A.

In certain states in the U.S, a distinction is drawn
between relevant and material evidence: evidence
647

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

is relevant when it tends to prove or disprove a
matter determinative of the case (although the
matter may not have been put in issue) while
evidence is material when it tends to prove or
disprove a fact in issue. In Philippine evidentiary
law, there is no such distinction because our rule
definition of relevant evidence is the same as the
American definition of material evidence.
Q.

What are collateral matters?

A.

Collateral matters are those which have no direct
connection to the fact in issue. Thus in a suit on a
promissory note by P against D, the fact that D did
not pay A in a prior loan is a collateral matter.

Q.

Is evidence on collateral matters allowed?

A.

No except when it tends in any reasonable degree
to establish the probability or improbability of the
fact in issue (trepif) (S4 R128). In other words, the
existence or non-existence of the fact in issue is
inferred by induction from the collateral matter.
. Hence evidence of the accused's pacific nature
may be adduced by the defense in a murder charge
where the accused had pleaded self-defense.

Competency
Q.

Discuss the concept of competency of evidence.

A.

Even if the evidence is relevant, but it is excluded
by the law or by the Rules of Court, the evidence
would be inadmissible. Otherwise put, evidence
must not only be relevant but it must also be
competent. Competency rules are based on public
policy considerations which override the relevancy
of the evidence.

648

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Where are exclusionary rules found?

A.

Exclusionary rules are present in the Rules of Court, for
example those relating to the various disqualification
rules and privileges, and in Supreme Court issuances,
for instance the Rule on Examination of a Child
Witness. They may also be found in the Constitution
such as under Sections 2 and 3, Article Ill (right
against unreasonable search and seizure, right to
privacy of communication and correspondence),
Section 12, Article Ill (rights of person under custodial
investigation), Section 17, Article Ill (right against selfincrimination), and in statutes, such as the AntiWiretapping Law (R.A. No. 4200).

Q.

A sued for annulment of his marriage with B.
During trial, A offered in evidence cassete tapes
of alleged telephone conversations of B with
her lover. The tapes were recordings made by
tapping A's telephone line, with A's consent
and obviouslywithout B's or her lover's. B
vehemently objected to their admission, on the
ground that neither B nor her lover consented
to the wire tap. The court admitted the tapes,
ruling that the recorded conversations are
nonetheless relevant to the issues involved.
Was the court correct in admitting the cassete
tapes in evidence? Explain. (96 Bar Q15-5).

A.

No, the court was not correct in admitting the tapes
in evidence.
Evidence in order to be admissible must be
both relevant and competent. Here the evidence of
the telephone conversations although relevant were
not competent since these are excluded under the
Anti-Wiretapping Law (R.A. No. 4200).

649

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Under the Anti-Wiretapping Law, it shall be
unlawful for any person not being authorized by all
the parties to any private communication or spoken
word, to tap any wire or cable, or by using any
other device or arrangement, to secretly overhear,
intercept, or record such communication or spoken
word. Any communication or information obtained in
violation of the law shall not be admissible in
evidence in any judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or
administrative hearing or investigation.
Q.

In a disbarment case, introduced in evidence
against the respondent was a birth certificate
showing that he had fathered children by his
mistress. The respondent invokes Article 7 of
P.D. No. 603 which provides that the birth records
of a person shall be kept strictly confidential and
that no information thereto shall be disclosed
except on request of the person himself or of a
court or proper government official and which
punishes with imprisonment and/or fine any
unauthorized disclosure. Is the birth certificate
admissible in evidence?

A.

Yes. Article 7 of P.O. No. 603 only provides for
sanctions against persons violating the rule on
confidentiality of birth records, but nowhere does it
state that procurement of birth records in violation of
said article would render said records inadmissible in
evidence. On the other hand, the Revised Rules of
Evidence only provides for the exclusion of evidence
if it is obtained as a result of illegal searches and
seizures. It should be emphasized, however, that said
rule against unreasonable searches and seizures is
meant only to protect a person from interference by
the government or the state. Consequently, in this
case where complainants, as private individuals,

650

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

obtained the subject birth records as evidence
against
respondent,
the
protection
against
unreasonable searches and seizures does not apply.
Since both Article 7 of P.O. No. 603 and the
Revised Rules on Evidence do not provide for the
exclusion from evidence of the birth certificates in
question, said public documents are, therefore,
admissible and should be properly taken into
consideration in the resolution of this administrative
case against respondent. (Tolentino v. Mendoza,
440 SCRA 519 [2004], cited in De Jesus v.
Sanchez-Malit, 8 July 2014).
Q.

Plunder cases were filed against former
President Estrada before the Sandiganbayan.
The prosecution moved for the issuance of a
subpoena duces tecum directed to Equitable
Bank and Urban Bank to produce the records
relative to Trust AccountNo. 858 and Savings
Account No. 0016-17345-9. Estrada moved .to
quash the subpoena duces tecum. Estrada
contends that the information found therein,
given their "extremely detailed" character,
could only have been obtained by the
prosecution through an illegal disclosure by the
bank officialsconcerned. Estrada thus claims
that the subpoenas must be quashed following
the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine. Is
Estrada's argument correct?

A.

No. The exclusionary rule is inapplicable. R.A. No.
1405 nowhere provides that an unlawful examination
of bank accounts shall render the evidence
obtained therefrom inadmissible in evidence.
Section 5 thereof only provides for criminal liability
to the violator. Hence the subpoenas cannot be
651

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

quashed. (Ejercito v. Sandiganbayan, 30 November
2006, Carpio Morales, J.).
Q.

Define documentaryevidence.

A.

Documentary
evidence consists
of writings,
recordings, photographs or any material containing
letters, words, sounds, numbers, figures, symbols, or
their equivalent, or other modes of written
expression offered as proof of their contents.
Photographs include still pictures, drawings, stored
images, x-ray films, motion pictures or videos. (82
R130, as amended by the 2020 Amendments to the
Revised Rules on Evidence).99

Q. What is the meaning of "recording" under 52 R130?
A.

A "recording" consists of letters, words, numbers, or
their equivalent recorded in any manner. (See FRE
1001[b]). Under 82 R130 as amended by the 2020
amendments, recording includes "sounds." Hence
a recording of a conversation, speech, or other oral
communication is considered as documentary
evidence. Johns v. United States, 323 F.2d 421
(5th Cir. 1963), cited in the Notes of the Advisory
Committee to the FRE (2019).

Q.

What is the meaning of "photographs"under 52
R130?

A.

A "photograph" means a photographic image or its
equivalent stored in any form (FRE R1001[c])
offered as proof of their contents. Photographs
include still pictures, drawings, stored images, x-ray

99The
2020 Amendments to the Revised Rules on Evidence refer to the
2019 Proposed Amendments to the Revised Rules on Evidence which were
approved by the Supreme Court and which took effect on 1 May 2020. For
brevity, these amendments are referred to as the "2020 amendments." The
amended rules on evidence are referred to as the "2020 Rules on Evidence."

652

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

films, motion pictures or videos. (S2 R130 as
amended by the 2020 amendments). Hence a
CCTV footage of a person robbing a bank is
considered as a photograph included in the
definition of documentary evidence.
Q.

A witness was presented on the stand to testify
that he saw the accused robbing the bank and
that he also saw a CCV footage of the accused
robbing the bank. The defense counsel objected
to the portion of the testimony regarding the
CCTV footage saying that the best evidence or
the original document is the. footage. Should the
objection be sustained?

A.

No. If a witness is presented on the stand to identify
the photograph or motion picture as a correct
representation of events which he saw or of a
scene with which he is familiar, he adopts the
picture as his testimony, or, in common parlance,
uses the picture to illustrate his testimony. Under
these circumstances, no effort is made to prove the
contents of the picture, and the original document
rule is inapplicable. (Paradis, The Celluloid Witness,
37 U.Colo.L. Rev. 235, 249-251 [1965])

Q.

May a document be offered as object evidence?

A.

Yes. If the document is offered not as proof of its
contents but of its existence or physical condition or
features, then it is considered as object evidence.
Hence marked money used in a buy bust operation
and offered to prove the buy-bust is object
evidence. A paper containing the handwriting of a
person, offered as a handwriting exemplar, is an
object evidence.

653

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Milagros, the Plaintiff's wife, forged Plaintiff's
signature in a special power of attorney
purportedly authorizing Milagros to sell their
conjugal land. Armed with the forged SPA,
Milagros sold the land to the DefendantTan. The
price indicated in the deed of sale was P200,000.
According to the Defendant,what he really paid
was P700,000but Milagros had requested the
price to be understatedin order to save on taxes.
The trial court nullified the sale and ordered
Milagros and Plaintiff to return the purchaseprice
of P200,000to the Defendant. On appeal, the
Defendant argues that the trial court erred in
relying on the considerationstated in the deed of
sale as basis for the reimbursable amount
because a null and void document cannot. be . .
used as evidence. Is the Defendantcorrect?

A.

No. While the terms and provisions of a void
contract cannot be enforced since it is deemed
inexistent, it does not preclude the admissibility of
the contract as evidence to prove matters that
occurred in the course of executing the contract,
i.e., what each party has given in the execution of
the contract. The deed of sale as documentary
evidence may be used as a means to ascertain the
truthfulness of the consideration stated and its
actual payment. The purpose of introducing the
deed of sale as evidence is not to enforce the terms
written in the contract but to determine what each
party has given under the void contract to allow
restitution and prevent unjust enrichment. (Tan v.
Hosana, 3 February 2016, Brion, J.).

654

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

When a rule of evidence refers to the term
writing,document,record,instrument,memorandum
or any other form of writing, does such term
include an electronic document?

A.

Yes. An electronic document is a functional
equivalent of a paper-based document. (S1 R3,
Rules on Electronic Evidence).

655

J9JC9B0M

ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RULE (83-8 R130)
Q.

What is the original document rule?

A.

The original document rule provides that when the
subject of inquiry is the contents of a document,
writing, recording, photograph or other record, no
evidence is admissible other than the original
document itself. (83 R 130 as amended by the 2020
amendments).
The rule was formerly known as the best
evidence rule prior to the 2020 amendments. The
2020 amendments have adopted the more precise
term "original document rule."

Q.

The prosecution witness testified that he saw a
CCTV footage of the accused robbing the bank.
The defense counsel objected on the ground of
the original document rule. The prosecutor
argued that the CCTV footage is not a document
since it is not a writing. Should the defense
counsel's objection be sustained?

A.

Yes. Photographs, which includes motion pictures
or videos, are expressly included in the definition of
documentary evidence under 82 R130 and in the
original document rule under 83 R 130 of the 2020
Rules on Evidence.

Q.

Is there a different original document rule for
electronic documents?

A.

In the main, no longer. Formerly there was a
bifurcated approach to the original document rule:
one for non-electronic documents under the Rules
of Court and another for electronic documents
under Rule 4 of the Rules on Electronic Evidence

656

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

(REE). The key distinction was that under the REE,
duplicates were considered as the equivalent of the
original. (82 R4, REE). The 2020 amendments in
the main provide for a uniform approach to the
original document rule when it also adopted the rule
in 82 R4 of the REE by providing that a "duplicate
is admissible to the same extent as the original."
Q.

Mr. Carrascoso took an Air France flight from
Manila to Rome. While on a stop-over in
Bangkok, he was forcibly transferred from the
first class to the tourist class in order to make
way for "a white man." Mr. Carrascosoresisted
his transfer and a commotion occurred on
board the plane. The purser recorded the
incident in his notebook. Mr. Carrascososued
Air France. During the trial, Mr. Carrascoso
testified that after his forcible transfer to the
tourist class, the purser told him that he (the
purser) had recorded the incident in his
notebook and then read out the entry to him:
"First-class passengerwas forced to go to the
tourist class against his will, and the captain
refused to intervene." Air France's counsel
moved to strike out the statement on the
ground that the original evidencewould be the
notebook. Should the court grant the motion to
strike out?

A.

No, the court should not grant the motion to strike out.
The original document rule applies when the
subject of inquiry is the contents of the document.
Here the subject of inquiry is not the contents
of the notebook, but the purser's statement to Mr.
Carrascoso. Otherwise put the original document
657

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

rule applies only to documentary evidence but
not to testimonial or oral evidence. The purser's
statement was not written but oral in form.
(Air France v. Carrascoso, 18 SCRA 155).
Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co. and
designated W as the beneficiary. The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed
by a written notice designating the new
beneficiarysent by the insured and receivedby
X InsuranceCo. before the death of the insured.
After the death of H, Q demanded from X
Insurance Co. the proceeds of the policy,
claiming that she had been designated as the
beneficiary by H as may be seen from a copy of
a written notice signed by H and allegedly
receivedby X InsuranceCo. before H's death.
Q sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X
InsuranceCo. raises the defensethat it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required
written notice changing the beneficiaryfrom W
to Q. At the trial, Q did not producethe copy of
the written notice supposedly received by X
Insurance Co. Instead, Q merely presented R
who testified that shortly before H's death, H
had instructed R to write to X InsuranceCo. to
that effect.

R's testimony was objected to on the
grounds that it was in violation of the original
document rule, the original document being the
written notice. Rule on the objectlon.l'"

Hypothetical

100

is based on Question 9a of the 1978 Remedial Law Bar Exam.

658

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

The objection that R's testimony was in violation of
the original document rule should be overruled. The
original document rule applies only to documentary
evidence. Testimony by R on what H had told him
to do is not testimony on documentary evidence.
(See Air France v. Carrascoso, 18 SCRA 155).

Q.

At the trial of Ace for violationof the Dangerous
Drugs Act, the prosecution offers in evidence a
photocopy of the marked P100.00 bills used in
the "buy-bust"operation. Ace objects to the
introductionof the photocopy on the ground
that the Best Evidence Rule prohibits the
introductionof secondary evidence in lieu of
the original.
1) Is the photocopy real ( object) evidence or
documentary evidence?
2) Is the photocopy admissible in evidence? (94
Bar Q9).

A.
1) The photocopy is real (object) evidence because
the same is being offered not to prove the
contents of the marked money but to prove its
existence and use in the "buy-bust" operation.
2) The photocopy is admissible in evidence.
The objection that the introduction thereof
would violate the Best Evidence Rule does not lie
since the best evidence rule does not apply to
object or real evidence. (People v. Tandoy, 192
SCRA 28).101
101Under

the 2020 Rules on Evidence, a photocopy is the equivalent of the

original.

659

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Police officers arrested Mr. Druggie in a buybust operation and confiscated from him 10
sachets of shabu and several marked genuine
peso bills worth P5,000.00used as the buy-bust
money during the buy-bust operation.
At the trial of Mr. Druggiefor violation of R.A.
No. 9165(Comprehensive Dangerous Drug Act of
2002), the Prosecution offered in evidence,
among others, photocopies of the confiscated
markedgenuinepeso bills. The photocopieswere
offered to prove that Mr. Druggie had engagedat
the time of his arrest in the illegal selling of
dangerous drugs.
Invoking the Best Evidence Rule, Atty.
Maya Bang, the defense counsel, objected to
the admissibility of the photocopies of the
confiscated marked genuine peso bills. Should
the trial judge sustain the objection of the
defense counsel? Briefly explain your answer.
(17 Bar Q13).

A.

No, the trial judge should not sustain the objection
of the defense counsel.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that the offer in evidence of the
photocopied marked money did not violate the best
evidence rule since such a rule applies only to
documentary and not to object evidence.
Here the marked money was offered not to
prove the contents thereof but to prove the fact that
Mr. Druggie had sold the illegal drugs to the
poseur-buyer. (People v. Tandoy, 192 SCRA 28).

660

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Prosecution of D for kidnapping. Prosecution
witness W testifies that he received a ransom
note. D objects on the ground that the original
evidence is the note itself. Should the objection
be sustained?

A.

No. The Original Document Rule does not apply if
what is being testified to is not the contents of a
document but the fact of receipt of a document.
But if W will testify on the terms or contents of the
note, D can object on the ground of the Original
Document Rule.

Q.

Under the original document rule, what is
regarded as the original?

A.

An "original" of a document is the document itself or
any counterpart intended to have the same effect
by a person executing or issuing it. An "original" of
a photograph includes the negative or any print
therefrom. If data is stored in a computer or similar
device, any printout or other output readable by
sight or other means, shown to reflect the data
accurately, is an "original." (S4[b] R130, as
amended by 2020 amendments).

Q.

What is a duplicate?

A.

A "duplicate" is a counterpart produced by the same
impression as the original, or from the same matrix,
or by means of photography,includingenlargements
and miniatures, or by mechanical or electronic rerecording, or by chemical reproduction, or by other
equivalent techniques which accurately reproduce
the original. (S4[b] R130 as amended by the 2020
amendments). A "duplicate" means a counterpart
produced by a mechanical, photographic, chemical,
electronic, or other equivalent process or technique
661

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

that accurately
1001[e]).

reproduces

the

original.

(FRE

Q.

Proponent presents in evidence a photocopy of
a letter written by the adverse party without
accounting for the non-production of the
original letter. The adverse party objects on the
ground of the original document rule. Should
the objection be sustained?

A.

No, the objection should be overruled. A photocopy
is a duplicate since it is a counterpart produced by
photography which is a technique which accurately
reproduces the original. (See S4[b] R130).
Under S4(c) R130, "[a] duplicate is admissible
to the same extent as an original unless (1) a
genuine question is raised as to the authenticity of
the original, or (2) in the circumstances, it is unjust
or inequitable to admit the duplicate in lieu of
the original.
Under the former Best Evidence Rule, the
objection would have been sustained since a
photocopy is considered as secondary evidence.

Q.

What are the exceptions to the original document
rule?

A.

The exceptions to the original document rule in
which evidence other than the original document is
admissible to prove the contents of the document
are: (CLAPC)
C - Original is in the custody or control of the
adverse party and he fails to produce it after
reasonable notice.

662

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

0 - The original cannot be obtained by local
judicial process or procedures.
L - The original is lost or destroyed, or cannot
be produced in court without bad faith on the part of
the offerer.
A - Original consists of numerous accounts
or other documents which cannot be examined in
court without great loss of time and the fact sought
to be established is only the general result of
the whole.
P - Original is a public record in the custody
of a public officer or is recorded in a public office.
C - The original is not closely related o a
controlling issue.
Trial court's discretion to dispense with production
of original
Q.

At issue was whether or not President Joseph
Estrada resigned from the presidency. Presented
in support of the contention that Estrada resigned
were the excerpts from the Angara Diary in which
Estrada stated, "Pagod na pagod na ako. Ayako
ne, masyado nang masakit. Pagod na ako sa red
tape, bureaucracy, sa intriga. I just want to clear
my name, then I will go." Estrada objected to the
introduction of the excerpts on the ground that
the best evidence is the Angara Diary itself. Is the
objection meritorious?

A.

No. The SC adopted Wigmore's comment that
production of the original may be dispensed with, in
the trial court's discretion, if the opponent does not
bona fide dispute the contents of the document and

663

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

no other useful purpose will be served by requiring
production. Here Estrada did not bona fide dispute
the contents of the excerpt even though he was in a
position to do so. (Estrada v. Desierto, 356 SCRA
108 [2001 ]).
Q.

PetitionerConcepcionChuaand RespondentSuy
Ben Chua are the children of the late Chua Chin.
Upon the demise of Chua Chin, his spouse and
his children executeda deed of partition wherein
they waived their shares over the Hagonoy
Lumber in favor of their co-heir Chua Sioc Han.
Chua Sioc Han then sold the HagonoyLumberto
Respondent.Later Respondentdelivereda check
for P200,000 to Petitioner which the latter
encashed. Subsequently Respondent sued
Petitioner to collect on the P200,000which the
Respondentallegeswas a loan.
In her answer with counterclaim, Petitioner
alleged that the P200,000 was an advance
on her share in Hagonoy Lumber and
counterclaimed for accounting and delivery of
her share. Respondent filed an answer to the
counterclaim wherein he alleged that Petitioner
no longer had any interest in Hagonoy Lumber
because of the execution of the deed of
partition and that he is now the owner of the
Hagonoy Lumber by virtue of a deed of sale
executed in his favor by Chua Sioc Han.
Respondent annexed copies of the deed of
partition and of sale to his Answer to the
Counterclaim. Petitioner filed an unsworn reply
and countered that the deed of partition and the
deed of sale were not true and valid agreements
and did not express the true intention of the
664

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

parties, and that the deeds were only temporary
paper arrangements executed upon advice of
counsel until all the heirs could reach a final
agreement. The trial court ruled in favor of
Respondent. Petitioner contended that it was
error for the trial courtto admit mere copies of
the deed of partition and the deed of sale in
violation of the best evidence rule. Is the
Petitioner's contention correct?
A.

No the Petitioner's contention is not correct.
The Supreme Court has held in Gaw v. Chua,
G.R. No. 160855, 16 April 2008, that production of
the original may be dispensed with in the trial
court's discretion whenever the opponent does not
bona fide dispute the contents of the documents
and no other useful purpose will be served by
requiring production.
Here there was no dispute as to the terms of
either deed; hence the RTC correctly admitted the
photocopiesin evidence. Petitioner admitted signing
the deed of partition. As for the deed of sale,
Petitionerin effect admittedthe genuinenessand due
execution of the deed of sale when she failed to
specificallydeny it pursuantto 88 RB. The Petitioner
did not contest the contents of the deeds but simply
alleged that there was a contemporaneous
agreement that the transfer of Hagonoy Lumber to
Chua Sioc Huan was only temporary.
Note: Although Petitioner was not a party to
the deed of sale between Chua Sioc Huan and
Respondent and therefore is not required to deny it
under oath, she must still specifically deny its
genuineness and due execution. This Petitioner
665

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

failed to do and so she impliedly admitted the same
pursuant to 88 R8.
Loss, destruction, or inability to produce original
Q.

What is secondary evidence under the original
document rule?

A.

Secondary evidence is that, other than the original
document or an equivalent thereof, which may be
used to prove the contents of a document where
the case falls within any of the exceptions to the
original document rule.

Q.

What is the secondary evidence when the
original document is lost or destroyed, or
cannot be produced in court without bad faith
on the part of the offeror?

A.

Upon proof of the execution or existence of the
original and the cause of its unavailability, the
offeror may prove its contents by a copy, or by
recital of its contents in some authentic document,
or by the testimony of witnesses in the order stated.
(S5 R130).

Q.

Is there an order of priority in the use of
secondary evidence under SS R130?

A.

Yes. 85 R 130 states that the offeror may prove the
original document by a copy, a recital, or by
testimony of witnesses "in the order stated." This
means that before the offeror may resort to a recital,
he must first show that a copy is unavailable, and
before he may resort to testimonial evidence, he
must first show that a copy and a recital are
unavailable.

666

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

What is the properfoundationfor the introduction
of secondary evidence in the case of loss,
destruction,or inabilityto producethe original?

A.

The offerer must show: (EUR)
1)

Proof of the execution or existence of the
document.

2)

Proof of the cause of its unavailability, without
bad faith on his part. (S5 R 130).

3)

Proof of reasonable diligence and good faith on
the part of the offerer in the search for or attempt
to produce the original. (Citibank v. Teodoro,
G.R. No. 150905, 23 September 2003).

Q.

The original document was lost becauseof the
offeror's negligence. May he use secondary
evidence to prove the contents of the original
document?

A.

Yes. S5 R130 states that secondary evidence may
be introduced by the offerer "upon proof of its
execution or existence and the cause of its
unavailability without bad faith on his part." (Italics
supplied). This means that it is bad faith, not
negligence, which would preclude the offerer from
using secondary evidence.

Q.

Ajax Power Corporation, a utility company,
sued in the Regional Trial Court to enforce a
supposed right of way over a property owned
by Simplicio.At the ensuing trial, Ajax presented
its retired field auditor who testified that he
knew for a fact that a certain sum of moneywas
periodically paid pursuant to a written contract.
The original contract was not presented.
Instead, a purported copy, identified by the

667

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

retired field auditor as such, was formally
offered as part of his testimony. Rejectedby the
trial court, it was finally made the subject of an
offer of proof by Ajax. Can Ajax validly claim
that it had sufficiently met its burden of proving
the existence of the contract establishing its
right of way? Explain.(92 Bar Q13).
A.

No, Ajax cannot validly claim that it had sufficiently
met its burden of proving the existence of the
contract establishing its right of way.
Under the Best Evidence Rule, before a party
may introduce secondary evidence of an original
document, he must first lay the foundation
by proving the execution or existence of the
original document.
Here Ajax's field auditor testified only as to the
payment of a certain sum of money pursuant to a
contract but did not positively state that there was
an original contract of right of way in the first place.
Hence the copy was inadmissible in evidence.
(Manila Electric Company v. /AC, G.R. No. 71393,
28 June 1989).

Q.

Defendant was a cardholder of Citibank
Mastercard.WhenDefendantuses the credit card
in purchasing from a merchant,triplicates were
produced of the sales invoice, although the
cardholder signed the sales invoice only once.
One copy was for Citibank, another to the
merchant, and another to the defendant
cardholder.Citibanksubsequentlysued Defendant
for unpaid credit card debts. During the trial,
Citibank offered in evidence photocopiesof the
sales invoices or charge slips to prove the
668

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

obligation of the defendant. Citibank's assistant
manager testified that he had requested the
originals from Equitable Credit Card Network, Inc.
but this request was not acted upon by Equitable.
Defendant objected to the introduction of the
photocopies for being violative of the best
evidence rule. How should the court rule on the
objection? Explain.
A.

The court should sustain the objection.
The Supreme Court has held that there should
be reasonable diligence and good faith in the
search for or attempt to produce the original.
Here the original sales invoices might have
been found by Equitable. Hernandez testifying that
he had requested the originals from Equitable,
failed to show that he had subsequently followed up
the request.
Moreover when more than one original exists,
it must appear that all of them have been lost,
destroyed, or cannot be produced in court before
secondary evidence can be given of any one. A
photocopy may not be used without accounting for
the other originals.
Each of the triplicates is considered an original
in accordance with S4(b) R130. Citibank failed to
show that all three originals were unavailable, and
that due diligence had been exercised in the search
for them. (Citibank v. Teodoro, G.R. No. 150905,
23 September 2003).102

102When
the photocopies of the sales invoices/charge slips were offered in
evidence, the Rules on Electronic Evidence (eff. 1 August 2001) had not yet
taken effect. Under the REE, the sales invoices or charge slips would have been

669

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co. and
designated W as the beneficiary. The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed
by a written notice designating the new
beneficiary sent by the insured and received by
X Insurance Co. before the death of the insured.
After the death of H, Q demanded from X
Insurance Co. the proceeds of the policy,
claiming that she had been designated as the
beneficiary by H as may be seen from a copy of
a written notice signed by H and allegedly
received by X InsuranceCo. before H's death.
Q sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X
Insurance Co. raises the defense that it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required
written notice changing the beneficiary from W
to Q. At the trial, Q did not produce the copy of
the written notice supposedly received by X
Insurance Co. Instead, Q merely presented R
who testified that shortly before H's death, H
had instructed R to write to X Insurance Co. to
that effect and that shortly thereafter, and
before H's death, R received in the mail a card
from X Insurance Co. on which was written
"Acknowledge receipt of notice of change of
beneficiary from W to Q" but that the card had
been mistakenly thrown away.

R's testimonywas objectedto on the ground
that it in violationof the bestevidencerule,the best
evidencebeingthe cardbearingtheacknowledgment
of receipt.Ruleon the objection.103
considered as electronic documents and hence the photocopies thereof would be
the equivalent of the original.
103Hypothetical
based on Question 9a of the 1978 Remedial Law Bar Exam.

670

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

Objection sustained. In order for secondary
evidence in the form of testimonial evidence to be
admitted, the proponent should have laid the basis
therefor pursuant to SS R130.
Here while R's testimony that the card was
mistakenly thrown away may have been adequate
to existence of the card and its subsequent loss or
unavailability, his testimony did not show that a
copy of the card or an authentic recital thereof was
also unavailable. Hence the objection should be
sustained.

Q.

What is the proper foundationfor the introduction
of secondary evidence in the case where the
original is in the custody or control of the party
againstwhom the evidenceis soughtto be offered?

A.

The offerer must show: (ER)

Q.

1)

Proof of the existence of the document.

2)

Proof of reasonable notice to produce to the
adverse party and failure to produce.

P filed against Dan action for the recovery of a
stock certificate wrongfully obtained and
withheld by D. P offered in evidencea photocopy
of the stock certificate. D objected on the
ground of the best evidence rule and stated that
no notice to produce the original was given to
him. P counters that a notice to produce is not
necessary where the nature of the action is in
itself a notice and where the document has
been wrongfully obtained or withheld by the
adverse party. How should the court rule on D's
objection? Explain.
671

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The court should sustain D's objection.
The provision in the former 86 R130 which
states that the notice to produce is not necessary
where the writing is itself a notice, or where it has
been wrongfully obtained or withheld by the adverse
party has been deleted in the present 86 R130.

Q.

What is the secondary evidence in the case of
the exception under S3(c) R130 regarding
numerous accounts?

A.

The contents of the numerous accounts or
documents may be presented in the form of a chart,
summary, or calculation.
The originals shall be available for examination
or copying, or both, by the adverse party at a
reasonable time and place. The court may order
that they be produced in court. (87 R130, 2020
Rules on Evidence).

Q.

What is the condition precedent for the admission
of a summary of numerous documents under
S3(c) R130?

A.

The trial court may admit a summary of
voluminousoriginal documents, in lieu of original
documents, if the party has shown that the
underlying writings are numerous and that an incourt examination of these documents would be
inconvenient. In other words, S3(c) R130 does
away with the item-by-item court identification
and authentication of voluminous exhibits
which would only be burdensome and tedious
for the parties and the court.

672

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

However, as a condition precedent to the
admission of a summary of numerous
documents, the proponentmust lay a proper
foundation for the admission of the original
documents on which the summary is based.
The proponent must prove that the source
documents being summarized are also admissible if
presented in court. In concrete terms, the source
documents must be shown to be original, and
not secondary. Furthermore,the source documents
must likewise be accessible to the opposing party
so that the correctness of the summary of the
voluminous records may be tested on crossexamination and/or may be refuted in pleadings. In
ordinary trial-type proceedings, a proper foundation
for the introduction of a summary may be
established through the "testimony of the person
who is responsible for the summary's preparation,
or the person who supervised the preparation of the
summary. Furthermore, when a party invokes S3(c)
R130, he does not similarly invoke S3(a), (b),
and/or ( d), R 130. He does not likewise claim that
the original documents have been lost or
destroyed. The party merely asserts that the
numerous documents cannot be examined in court
without great loss of time and that the fact sought to
be established from these documents is only the
general result of the whole.
Whenever a party seeks an exemption under
the best evidence rule pursuant to S3(c) R130, he
asks permission from the trial court to produce a
summary of numerous documents, whose
originals are available to the adverse party for
inspection. He does not ask permissionfrom
the trial court to present in evidence the

673

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

numerous non-original documents. Otherwise,
the very purpose of S3(c) R130 would be defeated.
In that case, every exhibit of non-original
documents would be identified, authenticated, and
cross-examined, leading to a tedious and protracted
litigation. Thus, if a party desires to present
photocopiesof the original documents, he must
first establish that the presentation of photocopies
is justified under S3(a), (b), and/or (d), R130. He
must establish the presence of all the elements
under these provisions. (Republic v. Mupas, 8
September 2015, e.b., Brion, J.).
Thus in a case, the SC said that it could not
give any weight to a summary of costs prepared by
an auditing firm, since the firm did not state in its
summary that it examined the original documents
allegedly proving the costs. Although a "compliance"
was later submitted, the same merely consisted of
photocopies whose presentation was not shown to
be justified under S3(a)(b), and/or (d) of R130. (Id.).
Q.

What is the secondary evidence in case where
the original is a public record?

A.

The contents of the public record may be proved by
a certified copy issued by the public officer in
custody thereof.

Public record or recorded in a public office
Q.

Respondent offered in evidence, Exhibit H, a
photocopy of a deed of sale. On the photocopy is
a stamped notation signed by an assessment
officer in the local assessor's office which states
that the photocopy is a "certified true xerox
copy." The petitioner objected to the offer on the

674

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

ground that it violates the best evidence rule but
the trial court overruled the objection and
admitted the photocopy. Was the admission of
the photocopy in evidenceproper?
A.

No, on two grounds.
First the attestation made by the assessment
officer is defective for it did not state "that the copy
is a correct copy of the original." (See 825 R132).
Second the assessor's office is not the official
repository of original notarized deeds of sale and
could not have been the legal custodian
contemplated in the rules. It is the notary public or
the proper court that has custody of his notarial
register that could have produced the original or a
certified true copy thereof. (Heirs of Gabatan v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 150206, 13 March 2009).

Q.

PCGG on behalf of the Republic filed a
complaint for reversion against former President
Marcos.Upon his death he was substituted by his
heirs. During the trial, the PCGG presented
certified true photocopies of Pantranco'sarticles
of incorporations, memorandum of agreement,
and purchase agreement. The PCGG also
presented a photocopy of the proceedings
before the PCGG. These were objected to by
respondents on the ground that they violate the
best evidence rule. Petitioner contends that
these documents fall within the exception under
S3(d) R130,that is, these documents are public
records in the custody of a public officer or are
recorded in a public office. It is its theory that
since these documents were collected by the
PCGG,then, necessarily, the conditions for the

675

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

exception to apply had been met. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

Yes. The fact that Pantranco's articles of
incorporations, memorandum of agreement, and
purchase agreement were collected by the PCGG
in the course of its investigation of the Marcoses'
alleged ill-gotten wealth do not make the same
public records within the purview of 83(d) and 87
R130 as well as 819(c) R132.104
As to the copy of the T8N of the proceedings
before the PCGG, while it may be considered as a
public document under 819(a) R132 since it was
taken in the course of the PCGG's exercise of its
mandate, it was not attested to by the legal
custodian to be a correct copy of the original. This
omission falls short of the requirement of 824 and
825 R132. (Republic v. Marcos-Manotoc, G.R No.
171701, 8 February 2012).

Q.

Plaintifffiled case againstDefendant.A document
needed by Plaintiff to prove his case is in the
possession of X, but despite the issuance of a
subpoena duces tecum, the document could
not be obtained because the subpoena could
not be served on X whose whereabouts are
unknown. May the Plaintiff introduce secondary
evidence in lieu of the original document?

A.

Yes. The 2020 Rules introduced another exception
to the original document rule, that is, when the
original cannot be obtained by local judicial
processes or procedures.

104The
decision did not expound on why the articles of incorporation, etc.,
were not public documents under S3(d) R130. It is submitted that applying the
Heirs of Gabatan ruling, the PCGG may not be considered as the legal custodian
of such documents as it is not an official repository thereof.

676

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Explain the exception where "[t]he original is
not closely related to a controlling issue."

A.

This essentially refers to the situation wherein the
contents of the document are not the subject of
inquiry. Thus in a case wherein the parties do not
dispute the terms of a contract, the issue being
whether there was a breach of the contract,
secondary evidence of such contract is admlsslble."'"

Best Evidence Rule Under The REE
Q.

What are the Rules on Electronic Evidence?

A.

The Rules on Electronic Evidence (REE) are those
rules applicable whenever an electronic document
is offered or used in evidence.

Q.

When did the REE take effect?

A.

The REE took effect on 1 August 2001.

Q.

What are the cases covered by the REE?

A.

The REE shall apply to all criminal and civil actions
and proceedings, as well as quasi-judicial and
administrative cases. (S2 R1 REE).106

Q.

Police officers invited suspect Enojas to come
with them aboard their car. Later the police got
involved in a firefight at a 7-11 store in which
one gunman and one officer was killed. In the
confusion, Enojas disappeared but left his cell
phone in his cab. Officer Cambi got the
cellphone and pretending to be Enojas was able
10

5The exception seems to be tautological since the main rule already

provides that it applies only to cases when the subject of inquiry is the contents
of a document
106S.C.
Resolution dated 24 September 2002 (effective 14 October 2002)
expanded the coverage of the REE to criminal actions and proceedings.

677

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

to cause the entrapment and arrest of the
suspects in the killing. Enojas was himself
arrested. The accused were charged with
murder. The text messages sent to the phone
recovered from the taxi driven by Enojas clearly
made referencesto the 7 -11 shootout and to the
wounding of "Kua Justin," one of the gunmen,
and his subsequent death. The context of the
messages showed that the accused were
members of an organized group of taxicab
drivers engaged in illegal activities. May the
transcript of the text messages be used in
evidence against the accused?
A.

Yes. As to the admissibility of the text messages, the
Regional Trial Court admitted them in conformity with
the Court's earlier Resolution applying the Rules on
Electronic Evidence to criminal actions. (A.M. No. 017-01-SC, Re: Expansion of the Coverage of the Rules
on Electronic Evidence, September 24, 2002,
effective 14 October 2002). Text messages are to be
proved by the testimony of a person who was a party
to the same or has personal knowledge of them.
Here, P03 Cambi, posing as the accused Enojas,
exchanged text messages with the other accused in
order to identify and entrap them. As the recipient of
those messages sent from and to the mobile phone in
his possession, P03 Cambi had personal knowledge
of such messages and was competent to testify on
them. (People v. Enojas, 10 March 2014). (Note:
The pronouncement as to the inclusion of criminal
actions and proceedings in the coverage of the REE
cleared up doubts engendered by Ang v. People,
G.R. No. 182835, 20 April 2010, where the Supreme
Court in an obiter stated that the REE does not
apply to criminal actions).
678

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q. What is an electronic document?
A.

An electronic document is defined in the REE as
information or the representation of information,
data, figures, symbols or other modes of written
expression by which a right is established or an
obligation extinguished, or by which fact may be
proved, which is received, recorded, transmitted,
stored, processed, retrieved, or
produced
electronically.(81 ((h) R2, REE). It includes digitally
signed documents and print-outs. (Id.).

Q. What is an electronic data message?
A.

An electronic data message refers to information
generated, sent, received or stored by electronic,
optical or similar means. (81 (g), R2, REE). For
purposes of the REE, the term "electronicdocument"
may be used interchangeablywith "electronic data
message." (81 (h) R2, REE).

Q. Give examples of electronic documents.
A.

Examples of electronic documents are emails,
recorded or saved text messages, and computergenerateddocuments.A documentwhich is scanned
is also an electronic document.

Q. State the rule on admissibilityof electronic
documents. (03 Bar Q19a)
A.

An electronic document is admissible in evidence if
it complies with the rules on admissibility prescribed
by the Rules of Court and related laws and is
authenticated in the manner prescribed by the
Rules on Electronic Evidence. (82 R3 REE).

679

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the original of an electronic document?

A.

An electronic document shall be regarded as the
equivalent of an original document under the Best
Evidence Rule if it is a printout or output readable
by sight or other means, shown to reflect the data
accurately. (S1 R4 REE). The image of an electronic
document shown in the monitor is an original, as
well as the printout thereof.

Q.

Is a copy or duplicate considered an equivalent
of the original under the REE?

A.

Yes under the REE, copies or duplicates are
considered as the equivalent of the originals. (S2
R4, REE). Thus a photocopy of an email printout is
admissible without accounting for the nonproduction of the original.
Under the 2020 amendments, the best
evidence rule under the REE is substantially similar
to the original document rule under the Rules
of Evidence.

Q.

What is a copy or a duplicate?

A.

The following are considered as copies or duplicates:
1)

DUPLICATE ORIGINALS. When a document
is in two or more copies executed at or about
the same time with identical contents, or

2)

COUNTERPART. When a document is a
counterpart produced by the same impression
as the original, or from the same matrix, or by
mechanical or electronic re-recording, or by
chemical reproduction, or by other equivalent
techniques which accurately reproduces the

680

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

original (IMMECE). A photocopy is a counterpart
and hence equivalent to the original.
Q.

When is a copy or duplicate not admissible to
the same extent as the original?

A.

A copy or a duplicate shall not be admissible to the
same extent as the original if:
(AU)


a genuine question is raised
authenticity of the original; or

as

to

the



in the circumstances it would be unjust or
inequitable to admit the copy in lieu of the
original. (82 R4, REE).

Q.

Is the Best Evidence Rule under the Rules on
Electronic Evidence applicable to non-electronic
documents?

A.

A perusal of 82 R4 REE would indicate that it
applies to electronic and non-electronic documents
as the term "electronic document" is not used
therein. Indeed FRE 1001(4) and 1003,107 from
which 82 R4 REE was substantially copied, applies
to all kinds of documents without distinction. Prof.
Jesus M. Disini Jr. writes that "Section 2 [R4] is a
substantial amendment to the Best Evidence Rule
that affects
even paper-based
documents."
(JESUS M. DISINI, JR., THE RULES ON
ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE 20 [1st ed., 2001]).

107Here

"FRE 1001(4)" is shorthand for the United States Federal Rules of
Evidence, Section 1001(4).

681

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

However in MCC Industrial Corporation v.
Ssangyong Corp., G.R. No. 170633, 17 October
2007, the Supreme Court held that the best
evidence rule under the REE does not apply to
non-electronic documents.
With the 2020 amendments, the question has
become moot since the 2020 amendments adopted
the rule in the REE that duplicates are the
equivalent of the original.
Q.

Are text messages
communications?

A.

Yes (S1 (k) R2, REE). Once saved or recorded
however they become electronic documents and
are thus subject to the best evidence rule.

Q.

Do evidentiary rules on documents (such as the
best evidence rule and the parol evidence rule)
apply to electronicdocuments?

A.

Yes. Whenever a rule of evidence refers to the term
writing, document, record, instrument, memorandum
or any other form of writing, such term shall
be deemed to include an electronic document. (S1
R3, REE).

682

ephemeral

electronic

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
Q.

What is the parol evidence rule?

A.

It is the rule which provides that once the terms of
an agreement have been reduced to writing, it is
considered as containing all the terms agreed upon
and there can be, between the parties and their
successors in interest, no evidence of such terms
other than the contents of the written agreement.
(810 R130).

Q.

What are the reasons behind the parol evidence
rule?

A.

The reasons behind the parol evidence rule are the
following:
Under the Integration Rule, it is presumed that
the parties to a written contract intended it to
integrate all the terms of their agreement.
The rule is also intended to give stability to
written contracts and to remove the possibility and
temptation of perjury.

Q.

What is parol evidence?

A.

Parol evidence is any evidence, whether oral or
written, outside of the written agreement, which is
offered to modify, explain or add to the terms of the
written agreement. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC EVIDENCE 36 [2004 ed.]).

Q.

Distinguish the parol evidence rule from the
statute of frauds under Article 1403 of the
Civil Code.

683

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

AS TO SCOPE. The parol evidence rule covers all
written agreements while the Statute of Frauds
covers only the agreements mentioned in Article
1403 of the Civil Code.
AS
TO
PRESENCE
OF
WRITTEN
AGREEMENT. In the parol evidence rule, there is a
written agreement, while in the Statute of Frauds,
there is no written agreement.
AS TO ENFORCEABILITY OF CONTRACT. In
the parol evidence rule, there is an enforceable
agreement, while in the statute of frauds there is no
enforceable contract.
AS TO PURPOSE. In the parol evidence rule, the
purpose is to bar parol evidence to modify, explain, or
add to the terms of the written agreement, while in the
statute of frauds, the purpose is to bar a party from
proving certain agreements by oral evidence.
AS TO NATURE OF EVIDENCE BARRED. In
the parol evidence rule, what is barred may either be
oral or written evidence, while in the statute of frauds,
what is barred is oral but not written evidence.

Q.

Does the parol evidence rule apply to all kinds
of written documents?

A.

No. The parol evidence rule applies only to written
contracts. Thus a receipt which is merely proof of
payment is not covered by the rule. A will is
considered a written agreement for purposes of the
parol evidence rule.

Q.

Leoncia, who was illiterate, sold a parcel of land
to her cousin Victoria. Leoncia thumbmarked a
document which Victoria told Leoncia was a
deed of sale of Lot A, although the deed actually
684

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

described Lot B. At the trial of a case filed by
Victoria to recover Lot B from its present
possessor,the defendantcalledLeonciato testify
for him that what she really intendedto sell and
understoodas having sold to Victoria was Lot A.
Victoria objectedto the testimonyon the ground
that it would violate the parol evidence rule.
ShouldVictoria's objectionbe sustained?
A.

No. The parol evidence rule applies only to the
parties to the contract and their successors-ininterest. Here the one offering the parol evidence
(the defendant in the action for recovery filed by
Victoria)
was a stranger to the deed of sale.
Hence he is not bound by the parol evidence rule.
(Lechugas v. Court of Appeals, 143 SCRA 355).

Q.

Six siblings are co-owners of a parcel of land.
Four of the siblings sold their shares in the land
 to Ygoiia in a deed of sale, while the remaining
two (Petitioners) did not. Petitioners contend
that while not indicated in the deed of .sale,
there was an oral undertaking on the part of
Ygoiia to survey the lands, segregate the
Petitioners' portion, and deliver certificates of
title to them, as part of the consideration of the
sale. Ygoiia argues that Petitioners cannot
prove such undertaking as it would violate the
parol evidence rule. Petitioners counter that the
parol evidence rule does not apply to them
since they are strangers to the deed of sale.
May Petitioners introduce evidence of Ygoiia's
oral undertaking to them?

A.

No, since this would violate the parol evidence rule.
Assuming the truth of the oral undertaking, that
would make the Petitioners beneficiaries of a

685

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

stipulation pour autrui under Article 1311 of the Civil
Code. A beneficiary of a stipulation pour autrui
obviously bases his claim on the contract. He therefore
cannot claim to be a stranger to the contract and resist
the application of the parol evidence rule. (Pacres v.
Ygona, 5 May 2010, Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

Does the parol evidence rule apply to both
private and public documents? Does it apply to
written agreements which are signed by only
one party or to unilateral agreements?

A.

The parol evidence rule applies to written contracts
be they private or public documents. The contract
need not be signed by both parties nor need it be
bilateral. (Inciong v. CA, 257 SCRA 578).

Q.

Are there exceptions to the parol evidence rule?

A.

Yes. A party may present parol evidence to modify,
explain, or add to the terms of the written
agreement if he puts in issue in his verified
pleading: (VISA)
1) The validity of the written agreement;
2) The failure of the written agreement to express the
true intent and agreement of the parties thereto;
3) The existence of subsequent terms, i.e., terms
agreed to by the parties or their successors in
interest after the execution of the written
agreement; or
4) An intrinsic ambiguity, mistake, or imperfection
(AIM) in the written agreement. ~810 R130 as
8
amended by 2020 amendments ).1
The amendment consisted of putting "verified" before "pleading."

108

686

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

How are the exceptions to the parol evidence
rule put in issue?

A.

In ortenez v. Court of Appeals, 266 SCRA 561, the
Supreme Court stated that the existence of an
exception to the parol evidence rule must be
"squarely presented as an issue" or otherwise
expressly averred. The pleading, for example,
should state that the contract "failed to express the
true agreement of the parties" not merely that "the
sale was subject to four conditions." An implicit
averment is not sufficient.

Q.

Explain and discuss the exception where the
validity of the written agreement has been put
in issue.

A.

This exception is based on the fact that if the written
agreement is void, there is no written agreement
which would be subject of the parol evidence rule.
Hence if it is alleged that a deed of donation is void
for being a donation mortis causa which did not
comply with the formalities of a testamentary
disposition, parol evidence may be adduced to
show the mortis causa nature of the donation.

Q.

Explain and discuss the exception regarding
the failure of the written agreement to express
the true intent and agreement of the parties.

A.

This exception is based on the reason that if the
written agreement failed to express the parties' true
intent and agreement, it would be anomalous to bar
parol evidence showing the parties' true intent and
agreement. In such a case, the court should be
empowedto ascertainthe true intentand agreement.

687

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The exception is not inconsistent with the
principle that the written agreement contains all the
terms agreed upon since here what is alleged is
that the written agreement at the outset failed to
express the parties' true intent and agreement.
For instance in a deed of sale with right of
repurchase over a parcel of land, the vendor in the
deed may allege that the true intent and agreement
of the parties is not to transfer ownership over the
land but to constitute a mortgage over the same in
favor of the vendee.
Q.

Rudlin Corporation entered into a contract with
Financial Building Corporation (FBC) for the
latter to construct a school building. Disputes
arose between the parties as to the date of
completion and the amounts payable under the
construction agreement. FBC filed an action for
collection against Rudlin. In its answer,Rudlin
averred that the construction agreementdid not
reflect the true contract price agreed upon,
which is .P6 million; that the amount of P6.9
million, which is FBC's bid price, was indicated
in the agreement solely for the purpose of
obtaining a higher amount of loan from BPI; that
the execution of said document was made with
the understanding between FBC and Rudlin that
the contract price stated therein would be
decreased to a mutually acceptable contract
price; and that, however, due to inadvertence,
the parties forgot to sign an agreementfixing the
true contract price. Rudlin invokedthe exception
to the parol evidence rule under S10(b) R130
wherein the written agreementfailed to express
the true intent of the parties. May Rudlin invoke
S10(b)R130?
688

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

No. S10(a)(b) R130 is available only where the
written contract is so ambiguous or obscure that the
parties' contractual intention cannot be understood
from a mere reading of the instrument. Here there
is no ambiguity or obscurity as to the contract price.

(Financial Building Corp. v. Rud/in International
Corp., 4 October 2010, Villarama, J.; RCBC v
Bernardino, 21 September 2016; Republic v.
Roque, 10 October 2016; Spouses Agbada v. InterUrban Developers, Inc., G.R. No. 144029, 19
September 2002; Heirs of Del Rosario v. Santos,
194 Phil. 671 [1981]).
Q.

Pedro filed a complaint against Lucio for the
recovery of a sum of money based on a
promissory note executed by Lucio. In his
complaint, Pedro alleged that although the
promissory note says that it is payable within
120 days, the truth is that the note is payable
immediately after 90 days but that if Pedro is
willing, he may, upon request of Lucio give the
latter up to 120days to pay the note. During the
hearing, Pedro testified that the truth is that the
agreement between him and Lucio is for the
latter to pay immediatelyafter ninety day's time.
Over the objection of Lucio, will Pedro be
allowed to testify as to the true agreement
or contents of the promissory note? Why? (01
Bar Q1 Ga ed).

A.

No. The exception to the parol evidence rule under
S10(b) R130 is available only where the written
contract is so ambiguous or obscure that the
parties' contractual intention cannot be understood
from a mere reading of the instrument. Here there
is no ambiguity or obscurity as to the period of
payment which is 120 days. (Financial Building

689

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Corp. v. Rud/in International Corp., 4 October 2010,
Villarama, J.; Spouses Agbada v. Inter-Urban
Developers, Inc., G.R. No. 144029, 19 September
2002; Heirs of Del Rosario v. Santos, 194 Phil.
671 [1981]).
Q.

X was hired by Philoil Co. as General Manager
for its oil exploration venture in Palawan. The
employment contract expressly provided that X
was to receive a salary of P10,000 a month plus
representation and travelling expenses of
PS,000 a month. Philoil Co. failed to pay and so
X filed an action for specific performance of the
employment contract. At the trial, Philoil Co.
attempted to prove, by oral testimony, that the
payment of salary to X was subject to the
condition that Philoil Co.'s exploration in
Palawan was already successful. Is such oral
testimony admissible? Reasons. (78 Bar Q1 Oa).

A.

No, such oral testimony is not admissible. Under the
parol evidence rule, once an agreement has been
reduced to writing, it is considered as containing all
the terms agreed upon and there can be no
evidence of such terms other than the written
agreement. In Ottetiez v. Court of Appeals, 266
SCRA 561, the Supreme Court clarified that parol
evidence of conditions precedent may be admitted
only when the document mentions such condition or
refers to an agreement containing such condition.

Q.

Jose Gamir-Consuelo Diaz Heirs Association,
Inc. (respondent) is a duly incorporated
corporation composed of the heirs of Jose
Gamir and Consuelo Diaz. It was the registered
owner of a parcel of land with an area of 1,836
square meters covered under TCT No. T-7550.

690

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

On 9 August 2005, after a series of
negotiations, respondent and the Republic of
the Philippines (petitioner), through the
Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH), executed a Deed of Absolute Salee
where it was agreed that respondentwould sell
the above-mentionedproperty to petitioner in
consideration of P275,099.24.The property was
eventually registered in petitioner's name under
TCT No. T-390639after respondent's receipt of
the full consideration.
On 15 November 2006, respondent filed a
Complaint before the RTC. It alleged that the
subject parcel of land was taken by the DPWH
sometime in 1957; the value of P275,099.24as
just compensation stated in the Deed of
Absolute Sale, was based on the value of the
property in 1957; it made verbal and written
demandsto petitionerfor the paymentof interest
from 1957;and it had a right to receive interest
because the DPWH had not paid just
compensationwhen it occupied the property in
1957.Is the respondententitled to such interest?
A.

No. The award of legal interest in cases where the
government acquires private property through
voluntary sale is not a matter of law. Unlike in cases
where the state exercises its power of eminent
domain or a party initiates expropriation proceedings
and other similar actions, in negotiated sale, there
is an existing contract that governs the relations of
the parties and determines their respective rights
and obligations.
In turn, these contractual
stipulations should be complied with in good faith,
unless they are contrary to law, morals, good

691

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

customs, public order or public policies. Hence, the
laws relating to contracts should govern in case of
controversy in their application.
Under 810 R130, when the terms of an
agreement have been reduced to writing, it is
considered as containing all the terms agreed
upon. In the present case, it is undisputed that the
Deed of Absolute Sale between petitioner and
respondent does not contain any provision
regarding the payment of interest. Petitioner agreed
to convey its property upon full payment of the
purchase price without reservation for any claim of
interest. No parol evidence can be admitted to
support respondent's claim of interest because it
never put in issue in its complaint the ambiguity or
validity of the Deed of Absolute Sale, or its failure to
reflect the parties' true intention. (Republic v.
Gamir-Consuelo Diaz Heirs Assoc. Inc., 12 Nov
2018, Reyes, J.).
Q.

Explain and discuss the exception regarding
subsequent terms.

A.

Parol evidence may be introduced to prove the
existence of other terms agreed to by the parties or
their successors-in-interest after the execution of
the written agreement.
The reason for the exception is evident: a
written agreement does not preclude the parties
from entering into any subsequent agreement
modifying or altering the first written agreement.
To hold otherwise would be to in effect say that
a written agreement cannot be amended or
modified thereafter.

692

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Explain and discuss the exception regarding
intrinsic ambiguity.

A.

Intrinsic ambiguity, also known as latent ambiguity,
refers to an ambiguity wherein a word or phrase is
susceptible of two or more meanings.
Parol
evidence would then be admissible to determine
the parties' intention for the court in such a case
would simply be construing or interpreting the
contract, not changing it or making a new contract
for the parties.

Q.

Give examples of intrinsic or latent ambiguity.

A.

The phrase "capacity of 6,000 liters" used in
connection with a contract for the sale of a distilling
apparatus. There was an ambiguity on whether the
capacity referred to is receiving capacity or producing
capacity. (Palanca v. Wilson & Co., 37 Phil. 306).
Parol evidence may be received on the matter.
"Dollars" in a contract could mean the currency
of the United States or Hong Kong or Australia. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 455 [6th rev. ed., 1989]). Parol
evidence may be received to clarify the currency
intended by the parties.
In a will, where the devisee is named as "my
friend Juan Dela Cruz" but the testator has two
friends by the name of "Juan Dela Cruz." Parol
evidence may be adduced to prove the Juan Dela
Cruz adverted to in the will.

Q.

What is meant by extrinsic or patent ambiguity?

A.

Extrinsic or patent ambiguity is synonymous with
vagueness, and refers to the situation where a
word or phrase has no definite meaning at all or

693

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

is not susceptible of any definite meaning. In such
a case, parol evidence is not admissible to cure the
lack of meaning for the court in such a case would
not merely be construing the contract but making a
new contract for the parties.
Q.

Give examples of extrinsic or patent ambiguity.

A.

A contract of sale refers to the subject matter as "a
parcel of land in BF Resort, Las Pirias City." Parol
evidence is not admissible to prove the parcel of
land being referred to.
A deed of donation which provides thus: "I
donate one of my diamond rings to Maria Clara Ortiz."
Parol evidence is not admissible to determine what
diamond ring was intended to be donated.

Q.

Explain the meaning of mistake as an exception
to the parol evidence rule.

A.

Mistake refers to an error in the drafting or wording
of the written agreement which changes the
intended meaning thereof.
The mistake must be mutual to both parties or
must have been occasioned by the fraudulent or
inequitable conduct (MFI) of one of the parties.
Otherwise the court cannot admit parol evidence to
prove a mistake. This is because the courts cannot
as a rule step in and refuse to enforce a contract on
the mere ground that a party made a mistake in
entering into the contract.

Q.

Explain the meaning of imperfection as an
exception to the parol evidence rule.

A.

"Imperfection" refers to an inaccurate statement, or
incompleteness in the writing, or the presence of,

694

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

inconsistent provisions in the agreement. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 454 [61h rev. ed., 1989]). For
instance if one part of the lease agreement states
that the contract is subject to automatic renewal if
not terminated while another part states that the
contract will expire on a fixed date, parol evidence
is admissible to prove what the parties really
intended regarding the lease period.
Q.

May a vendee introduce parol evidence that a
deed of absolute sale of land was subject to the
suspensive condition that the vendor would
first obtain a right of way to the land?

A.

No. Under the parol evidence rule, once an
agreement has been reduced to writing, it is
considered as containing all the terms agreed upon
and there can be no evidence of such terms other
than the written agreement. In Ortanez v. Court of
Appeals, supra, the Supreme Court clarified that
parol evidence of conditions precedent may be
admitted only when the document mentions such
condition or refers to an agreement containing
such condition.

Q.

James sued PNB for damages claiming that
PNB had unlawfully withdrawn the money from
his certificate of time deposit. PNB alleged that
it had set-off the deposit for due and
demandable loans obtained by James from PNB
and which were evidenced by promissory notes
(PNs). James testified that he had pre-signed
the PNs for future loans which were never
released to him. He did not present corroborative
testimony on this point. Nevertheless the RTC
ruled in favor of James holding that aside from

695

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the testimony of a bank officer, no other
evidence was offered to show that the proceeds
of the loans were released to James. May
James' testimony overcome the terms of the
PNs which James signed "forvalue received"?
A.

No. To overcome the presumption that the written
agreement contains all the terms of the agreement,
the parol evidence must be clear and convincing
and of such sufficient credibility as to overturn the
written agreement.
In this case, James' uncorroborated allegation
that the loan documents were merely pre-signed for
future loans is far from being the clear and
convincing evidence necessary to defeat the terms
of the written instrument. Thus, there is no reason
to deviate from the terms of the loan as appearing
on the PNs. Consequently, the trial and appellate
courts erred when they considered James'
unsubstantiated claim over the terms of the
promissory note and ruled that PNB failed to prove
James' receipt of the loan proceeds. (Phil. National
Bank v. Cua, 18 April 2018, Martires, J.).

Q.

Distinguish between the original document rule
and the parol evidence rule.

A.
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT
RULE

PAROL EVIDENCE RULE

Applies to all documentary
evidence.

Applies only to written
contracts (except wills).

Original is not
available in court.

Original is available in court.

696

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Rule of preference, i.e.,
secondary evidence may be
offered if foundation for
introduction laid.

Rule of exclusion: parol or
extrinsic evidence barred.

-,

Purpose of the secondary
evidence is to prove the
contents of a written
document.

Purpose of the parol
evidence is to modify,
explain, or alter the terms of
the written contract.

Bars any proponent even if he
is not a party to the
document.

Does not bar a proponent
who is not a party to the
written contract.

Can be invoked by nonparties to the document.

Can be invoked only by a
party to the written contract.

Q.

P sues D for recovery of Lot 1. In his complaint,
P avers that Lot 1 was sold to him by S., D
offers in evidence a deed of sale between Sand
P which states that what was sold to P was Lot
2. May P testify over a parol-evidence objection
by D that what was really intended to be sold
was Lot 1 and that the indication of Lot 2 was
just a clerical error?

A.

Yes. The parol evidence rule may be invoked only
by a party to the written contract. This can be
gleaned from S10 R130 which states that "there
can be, between the parties and their successors in
interest, no evidence of such terms other than the
contents of the written agreement." Here D was not
a party to the written contract. Hence D cannot
invoke the parol evidence rule and thus P should
be allowed to testify on the matter.

Q.

X sues Y for reconveyance of a parcel of land
on the ground that the deed of sale executed by
in in favor of Y does not express the true

697

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

agreement between them. At the trial of the
109
case, X sought to prove by parole
evidence
that their real agreement was merely on
mortgage. Y objected to this testimony of X on
the ground that the document of sale is the best
evidence. Should the objection of Y be sustained?
Reason. (76 Bar Q4b)
A.

No, the objection of Y on the ground that the
document of sale is the best evidence should be
overruled.
Under the Best Evidence Rule, the evidence
which is barred is secondary evidence which seeks to
prove the contents of a document. Here what X
seeks to prove is not the contents of the document of
sale but on the contrary that the terms thereof did not
express the true intent of the parties. Hence the
objection on the ground of the best evidence rule is
misplaced and should be overruled.
The relevant objection that Y should have
raised is the parol evidence rule. However his
failure to timely raise this objection means that the
same was waived. Even if the objection were timely
raised, the same would still have been overruled.
One of the exceptions to the parol evidence rule is
when the written contract fails to express the true
intent of the parties.
Here the allegation of X is that the written
contract fails to express the true intent of the
parties that the contract is one of mortgage rather
than sale. Hence an objection based on the parol
evidence rule would still have been overruled.
9This should read as "parol."

10

698

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

OBJECT EVIDENCE
Q.

What is object evidence?

A.

Object evidence is that which is directly addressed
to the senses of the court like tangible things
exhibited or demonstrated in open court. Unlike
testimonial and documentary evidence, the evidence
is directly perceived by the court without any
intervening medium, i.e., the document or the
witness. This class of evidence is referred to by
Wig more as evidence by autoptic preference, i.e.,
by preferring or presenting in open court the
evidentiary articles for the observation or inspection
of the court. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 434 ie" rev. ed.]).

Q.

What are the kinds of object evidence?

A.

Object evidence may be classified into three:
a) Objects that have readily identifiable marks like a
particular painting or a car with a plate number;
b) Objects that are readily made identifiable like a
hammer which is similar to other hammers of
the same make but on which an identifying
mark, like a scratch or etching is made.
c) Objects which are not readily identifiable nor can be
made readily identifiable, like drops of blood, hair,
drugs, and soil. (WILLARD RIANO, EVIDENCE:
THE BAR LECTURE SERIES 148 [2009]).

Q.

What is the chain of custody?

A.

Chain of custody is the method of authenticating
object evidence, especially object evidence of the
third kind, by showing its movement and location

699

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

from the time it was obtained until the time it is
offered in evidence.
Q.

Define chain of custody in drug cases.

A.

Dangerous Drugs Board Regulation No. 1 , series of
2002 defines chain of custody as "the duly recorded
authorized movements and custody of seized drugs
or controlled chemicals or plant sources of
dangerous drugs or laboratory equipment of each
stage, from the time of seizure/confiscation to
receipt in the forensic laboratory to safekeeping to
presentation in court for destruction." As a method
of authenticating evidence, the chain of custody
rule requires that the admission of the exhibit to be
preceeded by evidence sufficient to support a
finding that the matter in question is what the
proponent claims it to be. It would thus include
testimony about every link in the chain, from the
moment the item was seized to the time it is offered
in court as evidence, such that every person who
handled the same would admit how and from whom
it was received, where it was and what happened to
it while in the witness' possession, the condition in
which it was received and the condition in which it
was delivered to the next link in the chain. The
same witnesses
would then describe the
precautions taken to ensure that there had been no
change in the condition of the item and no
opportunity for someone not in the chain to have
possession of the same. It is from the testimony of
every witness who handled the evidence from
which a reliable assurance can be derived that the
evidence presented in court is one and the same as
that seized from the accused. (People v. Obmiranis,
G.R. No. 181492, 16 December 2008).

700

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

What shall the apprehendingteam having initial
custody and control of the drugs do
immediatelyafter its seizure?

A.

The apprehending team having initial custody and
control of the drugs shall, immediately after seizure
and confiscation, physically inventory and photograph
the same in the presence of the accused or the
person/s from whom such items were seized and/or
confiscated, or his/her representative or counsel, a
representative from the media and the DOJ, and
any elected public official (MADE) who shall be
required to sign the copies of the inventory and be
given a copy thereof. (Sec. 21, paragraph 1, Article
II of R.A. No. 9165 ).

Q.

Will non-compliancewith Sec. 21, paragraph 1,
Article II of R.A. No. 9165 render void the
seizure of and custody over the drugs?

A.

No, provided that the non-compliance is under
justifiable grounds and as long as the integrity and
evidentiary value (JI) of the seized items are
properly preserved by the apprehending officer/
team. (Sec. 21 [a], Art. II of the Implementing Rules
of R.A. No. 9165).

SPECIAL KINDS OF EVIDENCE
Q.

What is ephemeral electronic communication?

A.

Ephemeral electronic communication refers to
phone talks, text messages, chatroom sessions,
streaming audio and video (PTC SS), and other
electronic forms of communication the evidence of
which is not recorded or retained. (S2(k) R2, REE).

701

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

If the communication is recorded by audio,
photo or video means, then it becomes audio,
photo or video evidence. If recorded by electronic
or optical means, then the communication becomes
an electronic document. Thus a text message
which is saved becomes an electronic document.
Q.

Whenever a rule of evidence refers to a writing,
document, record, instrument, memorandum or
any other form of writing (WIRD MO), would
such term be deemed to include an electronic
document?

A.

Yes. (81 R3, REE). For evidentiary purposes, an
electronic document shall be the functional
equivalent of a written document under existing
laws. (Id., Sec. 7, Electronic Commerce Act).

Q.

What is DNA?

A.

DNA is the abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid.
It is the chain of molecules found in every
nucleated cell of the body (cm fenc). The totality of
an individual's DNA is unique for the individual,
except identical twins.

Q.

When may a court order DNA testing?

A.

The appropriate court may, at any time, either motu
proprio or on application of any person who has a
legal interest in the matter in litigation, order a DNA
testing after hearing and notice where the following
are shown (BN SNO):
a) A biologicalsample exists that is relevantto the case.
b) The biological sample:
(i) was not previously subjected to the type of

702

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

DNA testing now requested; or
(ii) was previously subjected to DNA testing but
the results may require confirmation.
c) The DNA testing uses a scientifically valid
technique.
d) The DNA testing has the scientific potential to
produce new information that is relevant to the
proper resolution of the case.
e) The existence of other factors, if any, which the
court may consider as potentially affecting the
accuracy or integrity of the DNA testing. (S4
Rule on DNA Evidence)
Q.

Is DNA testing conclusive proof of non-paternity?

A.

Yes.

Q.

Is DNA testing proof of paternity?

A.

Yes. If the value of the Probability of Paternity is
less than 99.9%, the results of the DNA testing
shall be considered as corroborative evidence; if
99.9% or higher, there shall be a disputable
presumption of paternity. (Rule on DNA Evidence).

QUALIFICATION OF WITNESSES
Q.

Who is qualified to be a witness?

A.

Subject to specifically provided disqualification, any
person who can perceive and make known his
perception to others is qualified to be a witness.
(S21 R130). A witness does not need to be
qualified beforehand as there is a presumption that
the witness is qualified to be such.

703

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Is religious or political belief or interest in the
outcome of a case a ground for disqualification
of a witness?

A.

No. (Id.) Interest in the outcome of a case may
affect the weight of the witness' testimony but is not
a ground for his disqualification.

Q.

Is conviction of a crime a
disqualificationof a witness?

A.

No. (Id.). It may however be used to impeach the
witness. (812 R132).

Q.

Are persons convicted of falsification of a
document, perjury, or false
testimony
disqualified from being witnessesin court?

A.

No. The disqualification under Article 821 refers to
disqualification
merely as an attesting and
subscribing witness to the will under Article 805 of
the Civil
Code and not to disqualification as a
witness in court. Hence such persons can still
testify in the probate of a will although obviously
not as attesting and subscribing witnesses.

Q.

D, E, and F are solidarily indebted to P in the
amount of P900,000. P filed a complaint for
collection of the P900,000against D, E, and F
before the RTC. D filed an answer within the
reglementaryperiod but E and F did not; hence
E and F were declared in default upon P's
motion. MayE and F testify in behalfof D?

A.

Yes. A defaulted party is not disqualified from
testifying in court in behalf of a non-defaulted party.
(Cavili v. Florendo, 154 SCRA 610).

704

ground for

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

The AFP Retirement and Separation Benefits
System (AFP RSBS) filed with the RTC an
application for original registration of three
parcels of land in Bicutan, Taguig. The AFP
RSBS presented as its witness Ms. Alma Aban,
its Vice President. After due proceedings, the
RTC rendered judgment dismissing AFP-RSBS'
application for failure to prosecute. The reason
of the RTC in dismissing AFP-RSBS's application
for land registration on the ground of failure to
prosecute was the lack of authority on the part
of Ms. Aban to testify on behalf of AFP-RSBS.
Was the RTC's dismissal of the application for
land registrationcorrect?

A.

No. There is no substantive or procedural rule
which requires a witness for a party to present
some form of authorization to testify as a witness
for the party presenting him or her. No law or
jurisprudence would support the conclusion that
such omission can be considered as a failure to
prosecute on the part of the party presenting such
witness. All that the Rules require of a witness is
that the witness possesses all the qualifications
and none of the disqualifications provided therein.
(AFP-RSBS v. Republic, 20 March 2013,
Villarama, J.).

Q.

Who are disqualifiedto be witnesses?

A.

Under the former Rules on Evidence, the following
persons cannot be witnesses: (MIM DIP)
1) Those who are mentally incapacitated
immature children. (821 [a] R130).

and

2) Spouses under the marital disqualification rule.
(822 R130).

705

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

3) Claimants against the estate of a geceased
person or against an insane person. (S23 R130).
4) Those who are disqualified by reason
Qrivileged communication. (S24 R130).

of

The 2020 Rules on Evidence have abolished
the disqualifications under Nos. 1 and 3.
Q.

Is a child qualified to be a witness?

A.

As a rule yes. Every child is presumed qualified to be
a witness. The court may conduct a competency
examination, motu proprio or on motion, if it finds that
substantial doubt exists as to the child's competency
to testify. (S6, Rule on Examination of a Child
Witness [RECW]). The 2020 amendments abolished
the disqualification by reason of immaturity.

Q.

Who is a child witness?

A.

One who at the time of giving testimony is below 18.
In child abuse cases, a child includes one who is 18
and above but is unable to fully take care of himself
or protect himself from cruelty, abuse, neglect,
exploitation or discrimination (CANED) because
of a physical or mental disability or condition.
(S4[a] RECW).

Q.

Are deaf-mutes qualified to be witnesses?

A.

Yes. Deaf-mutes are competent witnesses where
they (1) can understand and appreciate the sanctity
of an oath; (2) can understand facts they are going
to testify on; and (3) can communicate their ideas
through a qualified interpreter. (People v. Aleman,
24 July 2013, Leonardo-De Castro, J.).

706

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Marital DisqualificationRule
Q.

What is the marital disqualification rule?

A.

The rule which provides that during their marriage,
a spouse cannot testify against the other spouse
without the latter's consent. (823 R 130).110

Q.

What are the exceptions to
disqualification rule?

A.

A spouse may testify against the other in:

the

marital

1) A civil case by one against the other, or
2) A criminal case for a crime committed by one
spouse against the other or the latter's direct
descendants or ascendants.
Q.

Jose was charged with murder. The lone
evidence of the prosecution is the eyewitness
testimony of Clara. One day before Clara was
scheduled to testify for the prosecution, she
and Jose got married in a civil ceremony. May
the defense counsel object to the presentation
of Clara as a prosecutionwitness?

A.

Yes. It is enough that the marriage was already
existing at the time of the offer of the testimony,
even if the marriage occurred after the fact sought
to be testified to.

Q.

Allan and Narita were married on 1 August 1989.
After 2 months, Narita told Allan in confidence
that the 10-year-old Liza whom she claimed to

110Note
that the 2020 amendments removed the word "for" after "testify."
Hence if the wife is present in court and the court calls upon her to testify
pursuant to 87 R21, the husband cannot object if she will testify for him.

707

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

be her niece was actually her daughter by a
certain Basilio, a married man.
In 1992,Narita obtained a judicial decree of
nullity of her marriagewith Allan on the latter's
psychological incapacity to fulfill his marital
obligations. When the decree became final,
Liza, assisted by Narita, filed 10 cases of rape
against Allan purportedly committed in 1991.
During the trial, Naritawas called to the witness
 stand to testify as a witness against Allan who
objected thereto on the ground of marital
disqualification.
1)

As public prosecutor, how would you meet
the objection?

2)

Suppose Narita's testimony was offered
while the decision nullifying her marriage
to Allan was pending appeal, would your
answer be different? (1995Bar Q)

A.
1) I would argue that the marital disqualification
rule is not applicable since the marriage
between Allan and Narita was declared null and
void.
2) No, my answer would not be the different.
I would still argue that the marital disqualification
rule is not applicable since an exception to the
rule is in a criminal case for a crime committed
by one spouse against the latter's direct
descendant.

708

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Susan is the private complainant in a criminal
case for arson against accused Maximo, the
husband of Susan's sister, Esperanza. Prior to
the filing of the criminal case, Esperanzaand
Maximowere separatedde facto for six months.
The prosecution called as its first witness
Esperanza for the purpose of proving that
Maximo had poured gasoline on the house of
Susan knowing fully well that Susan and
Esperanzawere in the house and that Maximo
ignited the gasoline resulting in a fire which
destroyed parts of the house. The defense
counsel did not object to the offer of
Esperanza's testimony. In the course of her
testimony Esperanza testified that she saw
Maximo pour gasoline on the house and then
ignite the gasoline. Her direct examinationwas
suspended after she broke down and cried.
Afterwards, the defense counsel filed a motion
to disqualify Esperanzafrom testifying against
Maximoon the basisof the maritaldisqualification
rule. The trial court granted the motion and
expunged from records the direct testimony
of Esperanza.
Wasthe trial court's ruling proper? Explain.

A.

The trial court's ruling was not proper.
The purpose of the marital disqualification rule
is to preserve the harmony, peace, and tranquility
of the marital relation.
The act of Maximo in setting fire to the house
of Susan, knowing fully well that Susan and
Esperanza were there, had the effect of directly
impairing the conjugal relation. The records also

709

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

show that Maximo and Esperanza were separated
de facto for six months. Where there is no more
harmony to be preserved nor peace and tranquility
to be disturbed, the reason for the marital
disqualification rule ceases and a spouse may
testify against the other. (Alvarez v. Ramirez, G.R.
No. 143439, 14 October 2005.)
Note: It is submitted that the ruling in Alvarez
is an exceptional one and should not be extended
beyond the peculiar facts of the case, to wit: (1)
the defense counsel failed to timely raise the
objection of marital disqualification, in effect waiving
such objection; and (2) there was an allegation in
the information that at the time Maximo set fire to
Susan's house he knew fully well that Esperanza
was inside the house, which in effect was an
allegation that Maximo had committed an offense
against his wife. Alvarez should not be taken as a
carte blanche for holding that the marital
disqualification rule does not apply where there is
no harmony, peace, or tranquility in the marital
relation. The lack or absence of marital harmony or
peace is not an exception provided for in 823
R130. In fact, one of the reasons given by law
writers and courts for the rule is that where a want
of domestic tranquility exists, there is a danger of
punishing one spouse through the hostile testimony
of the other. (People v. Francisco, G.R. No. L-568,
16 July 1947).
Q.

Leticia was estranged from her husband Paul
for more than a year due to his suspicion that
she was having an affair with Manuel, their
neighbor. She was temporarily living with her
sister in Pasig City.

710

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

For unknown reasons, the house of
Leticia's sister was burned, killing the latter.
Leticia survived. She saw her husband in the
vicinity during the incident. Later he was
charged with arson in an Information filed with
the Regional Trial Court, Pasig City.
During the trial, the prosecutor called
Leticia to the witness stand and offered her
testimony to prove that her husband committed
the arson.
Can Leticia testifyover the objection of her
husband on the ground of marital privilege? (06
Bar Q15).
A.

Yes Leticia can testify over the objection of her
husband.
Under the Rules of Evidence, an exception to
the marital disqualification rule is in case of a
criminal offense committed by one spouse against
the other.
Here Paul's act of burning the house of
Leticia's sister at a time when Leticia was there was
for all intents and purposes a criminal offense by
Paul against Leticia. Hence this case is excepted
from the marital disqualification rule. (See Alvarez
v. Ramirez, G.R. No. 143439, 14 October 2005).
It should be noted that in Alvarez the defense
counsel failed to timely object to the presentation of
the accused's wife on the witness stand. Defense
counsel moved to disqualify the wife only after
she had testified.

711

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged
from her husband Walter becauseof the latter's
suspicion that she was having an affair with
Vladimir, a barangay kagawad who lived in
nearby Mandaluyong. Nenita lived in the
meantimewith her sister in Makati.One day, the
house of Nenita's sister inexplicably burned
almost to the ground. Nenitaand her sister were
caught inside the house but Nenita survived as
she fled in time, while her sister tried to save
belongings and was caught inside when the
house collapsed. As she was running away
from the burning house, Nenita was surprised
to see her husband also running away from the
scene. Dr. Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist who
lived near the burned house and whom Walter
medically consulted after the fire, also saw
Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the
fire. Coincidentally, Fr. Platino, the parish priest
who regularly hears Walter's confession and
who heard it after the fire, also encounteredhim
not too far away from the burned house.Walter
was charged with arson and at his trial, the
prosecution moved to introduce the testimonies
of Nenita, the doctor and the priest-confessor,
who all saw Walter at the vicinity of the fire at
about the time of the fire.
a) May the testimony of Nenita be allowed over
the objection of Walter? (13 Bar Q9a).
xxx
xxx

A.

Yes the testimony of Nenita may be allowed over
the objection of Walter.
712

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Under the Rules of Evidence, an except to the
marital disqualification rule is in a criminal case
committed by one spouse against the other.
Here the criminal case was for arson
committed by Walter against Nenita and her sister.
Hence Nenita's testimony is admissible over the
objection that the same is violative of the marital
disqualification rule. The fact that Nenita has been
estranged from her husband Walter for over a year
is of no consequence since Nenita and Walter are
still married to each other.
Q.

Vito was estranged and separated from his wife
Connie, because of the latter's affair with Bob,
an Irishman. While Connie and Bob were having
dinner in a restaurant, Vito appeared and before
Connie's shocked eyes, shot and killed Bob.
Vito was prosecuted for murder. The prosecution
calls as its witness Connie. The defense
counsel objected on the ground of the marital
disqualification rule. If you were the judge, how
would you rule on the objection? Explain.

A.

If I were the judge, I would sustain the objection.
Under the marital disqualification rule, a
spouse cannot testify against the other spouse,
without the latter's consent. The fact that Vito was
estranged and separated from his wife is not an
exception under the rule, the material fact being
that they were still spouses under the law.

Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the
qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11, 2009
a text message, which Mabini's estranged wife
713

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of his
death, reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u ni Mabini. Mtgal

n nyang piano i2. Mg ingat u bka ma tsugi k."
(a) A subpoena ad testificandum was served
on Gregoria for her to be presented for the
purpose of identifying her cellphone and
the text message. Mabini objected to her
presentation on the ground of marital
privilege. Resolve.
(b) Suppose Mabini's objection in question A
was sustained. The prosecution thereupon
announced that it would be presenting
Emilio's wife Graciana to identify Emilio's
cellphone bearing Gregoria's text message.
Mabini objected again. Rule on the objection.
(c) xxx
(d) xxx (10 Bar Q1).
A.

a) The objection should be sustained.
Under the marital disqualification rule, a
spouse may not testify for or against the other
without the latter's consent.
Here although the ground invoked was "marital
privilege," it is evident that Mabini was referring to
the marital disqualification rule. The mere fact that
Gregoria was estranged from Mabini is not an
exception to the marital disqualification rule.
b) The objection should be overruled.
Under the Rules on Evidence, the marital
disqualifaction rule may be invoked by a spouse
only against his or her spouse. The marital
714

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

disqualification rule may not be invoked by Mabini
against Graciana since the latter is not his wife.
As to the text message, it would be premature
to object to the same since it is documentary
evidence and the same has not yet been offered in
evidence.
Mere identification of a documentary
evidence is not an offer thereof.111
Q.

Susan filed a criminal action against Roberto
for bigamy, alleging that Roberto married her
during the existence of his prior marriage to
Marilyn. During the trial, Susan cited Marilyn to
testify against Roberto. Roberto objected and
moved to disqualify Marilyn on the ground that
he was her husband. Is the objection of Roberto
tenable? Why? (82 Bar Q19).

A.

No. An exception to the marital disqualification rule
is in the case of a crime committed by one spouse
against the other. Here the crime of bigamy is an
offense not only against Susan but against Marilyn
as well.112

Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint against a husband and
wife who are co-defendants. The Plaintiff called
the wife as an adverse-party witness. May the

111The
question suffers from an imperfection in that it stated simply that
"Mabini objected again" without specifying the evidence he objected to and the
ground for the objection. The suggested answer presumes that Mabini objected
to both the testimony and to the text message and that the ground of objection to
the first is the marital disqualification rule.
1121n
U.S. v. Orosa, 7 Phil. 247, 251-252 (1906), it was held that bigamy is
a crime that is not committed against the lawful spouse, and hence the latter
could be barred from testifying against his or her errant spouse. This ruling is
arguable. It cannot be gainsaid that bigamy is committed not only against the
second person married, but also against the lawful spouse. (People v.
Concepcion,41 O.G. 2878, cited in ANTONIO L. GREGORIO, FUNDAMENTALSOF
CRIMINAL LAW REVIEW 544 [1985 r" ed.]).

715

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

husband object to the presentation of his wife
as an adverse-partywitness?

A.

Yes on the ground of the marital disqualification
rule. To allow the wife to testify would in effect
mean that she would be testifying for or against her
husband. (Lezama v. Rodriguez, 23 SCRA 1166).

Disqualification by reason of adverse party's death
. or insanity
Q.

State the rule on disqualification by reason of
the insanity of the adverse party.

A.

Under the former Rules on Evidence, parties or
assignors of parties to a case, or persons in whose
behalf a case is prosecuted, against an insane
person, upon a claim against such insane person,
cannot testify as to any matter of fact occurring
before such person became insane. (S23 R130).
This disqualification has been abolished by S39
R130 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence which
provides that such parties, assignors, or persons
can testify on a matter of fact occurring before the
person became of unsound mind, subject to the
hearsay exception under S39 R130 regarding the
statement of the person of unsound mind.

Dead Man's Rule
Q.

State the rule on disqualification by reason of
the death of the adverse party, also known as
the Dead Man's Rule.

A.

Under the former Rules on Evidence, parties or
assignors of parties to a case, or persons in whose
behalf a case is prosecuted, against an executor or
administrator or other representativeof a deceased
716

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

person, upon a claim or demand against the estate
of such deceased person, cannot testify as to any
matter of fact occurring before the death of such
deceased person. (S23 R130). This disqualification
has been abolished by S39 R 130 of the 2020 Rules
on Evidence which provides that such parties,
assignors, or persons can testify on a matter of fact
occurring before the death of the deceased, subject
to the hearsay exception under S39 R130
regarding the statement of the deceased.
PRIVILEGES (MAP PP)
Q.

What are the disqualifications by reason of
privileged communications under the Rules on
Evidence?

A.

The following are the disqualifications by reason of
privileged communications under the Rules on
Evidence:
Marital Communication Privilege
Attorney-Client Privilege
Physician, Psychotherapist-Patient Privilege.
Priest's/Minister's Privilege
Public Interest Privilege.

Q.

May a police or law enforcement official
undertake surveillance, interception, or recording
of communications by terrorists or suspected
terrorists?

A.

Yes. Under Section 7 of the Human Security Act, a
police or law enforcement official may apply for a
written order from the Court of Appeals authorizing
717

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the surveillance or interception or recording of
communications by terrorists or suspected terrorists.
Such surveillance etc. shall not be authorized over
communications between attorneys and clients,
physicians and patients, journalists and their sources,
and confidential business correspondence.
Q.

Is the confidential character of a privileged
communication lost if it is in the form of an
electronic document?

A.

No. The confidential character of a privileged
communication is not lost solely on the ground
that it is in the form of an electronic document. (S3
R3, REE).

MARITAL COMMUNICATION PRIVILEGE
Q.

What is the marital communicationprivilege?

A.

It is the privilege which provides that the husband or
wife cannot be examined without the consent of the
other as to any confidential communication
received from the other during the marriage except
in a civil case by one against the other or in a
criminal case for a crime committed by one against
the other or the latter's direct ascendants or
descendants. (S24[a] R130).

Q.

Distinguish the marital disqualification rule from
the marital communication privilege. (74 Bar Q6)

A.

The marital disqualification rule is distinguished
from the marital communication privilege as follows:
AS TO PERIOD OF EFFECTIVITY. The
marital disqualification rule is effective only during
the existence of the marriage, while the marital
718

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

communication rule subsists even after the
termination of the marriage.
AS TO SCOPE. The marital disqualification
rule is a total prohibition against any testimony by
one spouse against the other, while the marital
communication privilege applies only to confidential
communications between the spouses.
AS TO A SPOUSE BEING A PARTY TO THE
ACTION. The marital disqualification rule can be
invoked only if one of the spouses is a party to the
action, while the marital communication privilege
may be invoked whether or not a spouse is a party
to the action.
MARITAL
DISQUALIFICATION RULE

MARITAL
COMMUNICATION
PRIVILEGE

A blanket disqualification of a
spouse from testifying
aoalnst the other

The privilege applies only to
confidential communications

Effective only during the
existence of the rnarriaqe

Effective during and after the
marrlaqe

Can be invoked only if one of
the spouses is a party
to the action

May be invoked whether or
not a spouse is a party
to the action

Q.

Ody sued spouses Cesar and Baby for a sum of
money and damages. At the trial, Ody called
Baby as his first witness. Baby objected, joined
by Cesar, on the ground that she may not be
compelled to testify against her husband. Ody
insisted and contended that after all, she would
just be questioned about a conference they had
with the barangay captain, a matter which is not

719

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

confidential in nature. The trial court ruled in
favor of of Ody. Was the ruling proper? Will
your answer be the same if the matters to be
testified on were known to Baby or acquired by
her prior to her marriage to Cesar? Explain.
(89 Bar Q11 [21).
A.

The trial court's ruling allowing Ody to call Baby as
his witness is not proper.
The Supreme Court has held that a wife, who
is a co-defendant of her husband in an action, may
not be examined as an adverse-party witness
without infringing on the marital disqualification rule.
(Lezama v. Rodriguez, 23 SCRA 1166 [1968]).
My answer would be the same even if the
matters to be testified on were known to Baby or
acquired by her prior to her marriage to Cesar.
The marital disqualification rule is a blanket
disqualification of a spouse from testifying against or
for the other spouse on any matter of fact, whether
confidential or acquired prior to the marriage.

Q.

Allan and Narita were married on 1 August 1989.
After 2 months, Narita told Allan in confidence
that the 10-year-old Liza whom she claimed to
be her niece was actually her daughter by a
certain Basilio, a married man.
In 1992,Narita obtained a judicial decree of
nullity of her marriage with Allan on the latter's
psychological incapacity to fulfill his marital
obligations. When the decree becamefinal, Liza,
assisted by Narita,filed 10 cases of rape against
Allan purportedly committed in 1991. During the
720

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

trial, Narita was called to the witness stand to
testify as a witness against Allan who objected
thereto on the ground of maritaldisqualification.
1)

xxx

2) xxx
3) Suppose the decision nullifying the marriage
was appealed and Narita died during the
pendency of the appeal, and soon after, the
legal wife of Basilio sued for legal separation
on sexual infidelity in view of Basilio's love
affair with Narita. At the trial Allan was called
by Basilio's wife to testify that Naritaconfided
to him (Allan) during their marriage that Liza
was her love child by Basilio. As counsel for
Basilio, can you validly object to the
presentation of Allan as witness for the
plaintiff? Explain.(1995Bar Q ed)
A.

1)

xxx

2)

xxx

3)

No, as counsel for Basilio I cannot validly object
on the ground of the marital disqualification rule
since the marriage had already been terminated
by Narita's death. Nor may I object on the ground
that Narita's statement is covered by the marital
communication privilege. The one who may
invoke the privilege is Allan, the party to the
marriage, and not Basilio. Finally, I cannot validly
object on the ground of hearsay since Narita's
statement is a declaration against interest and
hence excepted from the hearsay rule.

721

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Prosecution of H for the murder of P, the
paramourof H's wife W. The prosecutioncalls
W to the witness stand and offers her testimony
in order to prove the circumstancessurrounding
P's killing. After preliminary questions, the
Prosecution asks W if he saw H leave the
crime scene minutes after the killing of P. The
defense objects on the ground of the marital
disqualificationrule.
a) If you were the judge, how would you rule on
the objection? Explain.
Subsequently the prosecution asks W
whether, days before the killing while resting
in their bedroom, H had told her that he hates
P because of W's feelings for P. The defense
objects on the ground of the marital
communicationprivilege.
b) If you were the judge, how would you rule on
the objection? Explain.

A.

a) If I were the judge, I would overrule the objection.
Under the Rules of Evidence, objection to offer
of evidence must be made orally immediately after
the offer is made. (S36 R132).
Here the defense did not immediately object at
the time W's testimony was offered in evidence
although the ground for the objection (that W was H's
wife) was already apparent at that point. Hence the
defense waived the ground for the objection.
b) If I were the judge, I would sustain the objection.
Under the Rules of Evidence, objection to a
question propounded in the course of the witness's
722

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

oral examination must be made as soon as the
grounds therefor shall become reasonably
apparent. (836 R132).
Here the ground for the objection, that the
communication was made in confidence during the
marriage, became reasonably apparent only at the
time the question was propounded. Hence the
objection was timely made.
Q.

At A's trial for B's murder, the defense attempts
to present as its witness B's widow, X. She is to
testify that just before B died, she approached his
sprawled and bloodied husband and asked who
stabbed him. B, conscious of his impending
death, named Y as his assailant. The prosecution
moves to stop X from testifying because, her
testimony (1) is hearsay, and (2) will be violative
of the rule on privileged marital communication.
Rule on the prosecution's motion. Explain. (96
Bar Q15-1).

A.

Prosecution's motion to stop X from testifying is
denied.
While X's testimony on what B said is indeed
hearsay, it is however a dying declaration which is
an exception to the hearsay rule. B's declaration
related to the circumstances of his death and he
was conscious of his impending death. Being
excepted from the hearsay rule, B's dying
declaration is admissible in evidence. (838 R130).
X's testimony on what B had told her is not
covered by the rule on privileged marital
communication. Such rule cannot be invoked if the
communication was not intended to be kept in
confidence as in the case of a dying declaration
723

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

wherein the declarant's purpose is to identify his
assailant. (U.S. v. Antipolo, 37 Phil. 726).
Q.

Suit by Plaintiff wife against her husband. The
husband did not object to the wife taking the
witness stand against him. The wife was asked
regarding the contents of a letter written by her
husband to him. The husband objected to
the question on the ground of the marital
communication privilege. The Plaintiff argued
that the husband had waived the privilege when
he did not object to his wife taking the witness
stand. Should the objection be sustained?

A.

Yes. While the husband waived the marital
disqualification rule by not raising the objection
when the wife's testimony was offered in evidence
at the time she took the witness stand, he did not
thereby waive the objection based on the marital
communication privilege, The ground for the
objection based on marital communicationprivilege
became apparent only at the time the objectionable
question was asked of the wife.

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE
Q.

What is the attorney-clientprivilege?

A.

The privilege which provides that an attorney or
person reasonably believed by the client to be
licensed to engage in the practice of law cannot,
without the client's consent, be examined as to any
communication made by the client to him or his
advice given thereon in the course of, or with a
view to, professional employment. Nor can an
attorney's secretary, stenographer, or clerk, or
other persons assisting the attorney be examined
724

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

without the consent of the client and his employer
concerning any fact the knowledge of which has
been acquired in such capacity. (S24[b] R130 as
amended by the amended rules).
The rules safeguardingprivilegedcommunication
between attorney and client shall apply to similar
communications made to or received by the law
student, acting for a legal clinic. (S3 R138-A [Law
Student Practice Rule]).
Q.

What is the purpose
privilege?

A.

The purpose of the privilege is to encourage full and
frank communication between attorneys and their
clients and thereby promote broader public
interests in the observance of law and
administration of justice. The privilege recognizes
that sound legal advice or advocacy serves public
ends and that such advice or advocacy depends
upon the lawyer's being fully informed by the client.
The purpose of the privilege is to encourage clients
to make full disclosure to their attorneys. ( Upjohn
Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383 [1981]).

Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his
negligence, X hit and injured V who was crossing
the street. Lawyer L, who witnessed the incident,
offered his legal services to V. V, who suffered
physical injuries including a fractured wrist bone,
underwent surgery to screw a metal plate to his
wrist bone. On complaint of V, a criminal case for
Reckless Imprudence Resulting in Serious
Physical Injuries was filed against X before the
Municipal Trial Court (MTC) of Sta. Maria. Atty. L,

725

of the attorney-client

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the private prosecutor, did not reservethe filing
of a separate civil action. V subsequentlyfiled a
complaint for Damagesagainst X and Y before
the Regional Trial Court of Pangasinan in
Urdaneta where he resides. In his "Certification
Against Forum Shopping," V made no mention of
the pendencyof the criminal case in Sta.Maria.
xxx
e) Atty. L offered in the criminal case his affidavit
respecting what he witnessed during the
incident. X's lawyer wanted to cross-examine
Atty. L who, however,objected on the ground
of lawyer-client privilege. Rule on the
objection. (10 Bar Q4e).
A.

The objection should be overruled. The attorney-client
privilege applies only to the communications between
the attorney and client and the lawyer's advice given
in the course of or with a view to professional
employment. The contents of the affidavit do not
involve any communication between Atty. L and his
client but relate only to what Atty. L witnessed at
the time of the accident. Hence Atty. L may be
cross-examined as to the contents thereof.

Q.

Pedro went to the office of Attorney Juan.
Pedro told the latter that he had committed
murder and wanted to engage Attorney Juan as
defense counsel. However the two could not
reach agreement as to the amount of the
retainer so Pedro walked away without hiring
Attorney Juan. Is the communication by Pedro
to Attorney Juan that he had committed murder
privileged?

726

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

Yes. The attorney-client privilege extends to
communications made by a person to a lawyer
"with a view to professional employment." Hence
even if the professional employment of the lawyer
did not push through, any communication made to
the lawyer with a view to engaging the lawyer is
privileged. Also Rule 15.02 of the Code of
Professional Responsibility provides that "[a] lawyer
shall be bound by the rule on privilege
communication in respect of matters disclosed to
him by a prospectiveclient."

Q.

May the attorney himself be the one to invoke
the privilege?

A.

Yes, either the client or his lawyer may raise the
privilege. (Republic Gear Co. v. Borg-Warner Corp.,
381 F.2d 551 [CA2 1967).

Q.

What are the exceptions to the attorney-client
privilege?

A.

The following are excepted from the attorney-client
privilege:
i) Furtherance of crime or fraud. If the services or
advice of the lawyer were sought or obtained to
enable or aid anyone to commit or plan to
commit what the client knew or reasonably
should have known to be a crime or fraud.113
ii)

Claimants through same deceased client. As to
a communication relevant to an issue between
parties who claim through the same deceased
client, regardless of whether the claims are by
testate or intestate or by inter vivos transaction.

113This

is a codification of the well-known rule that the privilege applies
only to past not future crimes.

727

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

iii)

Breach of duty by lawyer or client. As to a
communication relevant to an issue of breach of
duty by the lawyer to his client or by the client to
his lawyer.

iv) Document attested by the lawyer. As to a
communication relevant to an issue concerning
an attested document to which the lawyer is an
attesting witness.
v) Joint clients. As to a communication relevant to
a matter of common interest between two or
more clients if the communication was made by
any of them to a lawyer retained or consulted in
common, when offered in an action between
any of the clients, unless they have expressly
agreed otherwise. (S24[b] [i to v] R130, 2020
Rules on Evidence]114
A lawyer may reveal secrets when necessary
to collect fees or to defend himself, his associates,
or employees. (Rule 21.01 [c], Code of Professional
Responsibility).
Q.

Illustrate the exception regarding
through same deceased client.

claimants

A.

A and B are brothers. Their father hired Atty L to
draft the will. Father died. B wants to show that their
father intended Lot B to belong to B. Atty. L can
testify that the Father intended to devise Lot B to B
as shown by .the will.

Q.

Illustrate the exception regarding breach of duty
by lawyer or client.

114These
exceptions were added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence. The
prior rule did not specify expressly any exception.

728

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

Where the client alleges that the lawyer's fees were
excessive, the lawyer can disclose relevant
communication to show that the case was complex
and difficult thus justifying higher fees.

Q.

Illustrate the exception
attested by the lawyer.

A.

A lawyer was the attesting witness to a will. In a
probate case, the lawyer may testify regarding the
attendant circumstances to the execution of the will
in order to show that the testator was of sound and
disposing mind.

Q.

Illustrate the exception regarding joint clients.

A.

The lawyer was hired by lender and borrower to
draft their loan and mortgage agreement. A dispute
arose between lender and borrower on whether
applying for government financial aid is an event of
default. Lender can present lawyer to testify that
the parties' intention was that such application is
an event of default thus justifying the lender into
calling in the loan."

Q.

Is the client's identity covered by the attorneyclient privilege?

A.

No. The general rule is that the client's identity is
not privileged because without a client, there can
be no attorney-client privilege; hence it is but
proper that the client be identified before the
privilege may be invoked. The general rule is
however subject to the following exceptions:

regarding

document

1) Where a strong probability exists that revealing
the client's name would implicate him in the very
activityfor which he sought the lawyer'sadvice.

729

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

2) Where disclosure would expose the client to civil
liability.
3) Where the government's lawyers have no case
against an attorney's client unless, by revealing
the client's name, the said name would furnish the
only link that would form the chain of testimony
necessary to convict an individual of a crime.
4) Where the client's identity is relevant to the
subject matter of the legal problem on which the
client sought legal assistance.
5) Where the nature of the attorney-client
relationship has been previously disclosed and
it is the identity which is intended to be
confidential, the client's identity is confidential
since revelation would result in disclosure of the
entire transaction. (Rega/a v. Sandiganbayan,
262 SCRA 124 [1996)).
Q.

The Republic, through the PCGG,brought a suit
against principal defendant Eduardo Cojuangco
Jr. for recovery of ill-gotten wealth. Included as
defendants were ACCRA lawyers Teodoro
Regala,EdgardoAngara,and others.The ACCRA
lawyers admitted that they had assisted in the
organization and formation of the corporations
involved in the sequestration proceedings and
that in keeping with office practice, they had
acted as nominee-stockholders in these
corporations.Droppedby the PCGGas defendant
was Raul Roco upon his promise that he would
disclose his client. PCGG told the ACCRA
lawyers that they would be dropped from the
complaint if they disclosed their clients, but the
lawyers refused to do so. The ACCRA lawyers
730

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

moved before the Sandiganbayan that they be
excluded from the complaint but the SB denied
their motion on the ground that the attorneyclient privilege does not apply to the client's
identity. Was the identity of the ACCRA lawyer's
clients privileged?

A.

Yes. The general rule is that the client's identity is not
privileged because without a client, there can be no
attorney-client privilege; hence it is but proper that the
client be identified before the privilege may be
invoked. The general rule is however subject to
exceptions, such as (1) where a strong probability
exists that revelation of the client's identity would
implicate him in the very activity for which he sought
the lawyer's advice, and (2) where the government's
lawyers have no case against an attorney's client
unless, by revealing the client's name, the said name
would furnish the only link that would form the chain
of testimony necessary to convict an individual of a
crime. Here for the ACCRA lawyers to identify their
clients would implicate them in the very activity for
which legal advice had been sought, i.e., the alleged
accumulation of ill-gotten wealth in the sequestered
corporations. Moreover disclosure of the client's
identity would provide the necessary link for the
prosecution to build its case where none had existed
before. The ACCRA lawyers should be excluded from
the complaint for it is clear that the only purpose for
their inclusion was to compel them to disclose their
clients. (Rega/av. Sandiganbayan, supra).

Q.

John Doe walks into a lawyer's office with a view
to engaging the lawyer as his defense counsel.
He confesses that he is a serial killer and has
killed 32 people. Is John Doe's communication to
his lawyer about his crimes privileged?
731

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes. The attorney-client privilege is all-encompassing
and covers communication regarding past crimes.

Q.

In the previous problem, what if John Doe tells
the lawyer that he intends to kill 32 more people
as he has a goal of one murder victim for each
square on the chessboard. Is this information
privileged?

A.

No. The attorney-client privilege covers only
communications or information regarding past
crimes. Information regarding crimes intended to be
committed or future crimes is not privileged. The
reason is obvious. The lawyer and any law-abiding
citizen for that matter has a duty to prevent crimes
when he is in a position to do so. Moreover the
privilege cannot be used as a shield to protect and
abet wrong-doing.
The exception regarding communication or
information regarding future crimes has been
codified in S24(b )(i) R 130 of the 2020 Rules on
Evidence.

Q.

a) Pedro Tigas, a known toughie, asked Atty.
Chloe to meet with him in the Jollibee Restaurant
in Harrison Plaza because he wanted to seek her
legal advice on an important matter. Atty. Chloe
had once before been consulted by Pedro Tigas,
who had then paid her well. When they met in
Jollibee Restaurant, he confided his planned
assassinationof PepengTaga,his rival for control
of the neighborhood in San Andres Bukid, Manila.
He wanted her to represent him should he be
apprehendedfor the assassination.Atty. Chloe did
not agree,and left the restaurantin a hurry before
PedroTigas could utter anything more.

732

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A few days afterwards, Pepeng Taga was
killed near his house in San Andres Bukid,
Manila.The police follow-up team arrested Pedro
Tigas on the basis of testimony by at least two
residents that they had heard him saying two
days before the killing that Pepeng Taga would
not live beyond 48 hours. Should Atty. Chloe
revealto the police investigatorwhat PedroTigas
had stated to her at the Jollibee Restaurant
without violating the confidenceof the latter as a
client? Explainyour answer.
b) Assuming that the meeting between Pedro
Tigas and Atty. Chloe in Jollibee Restaurant
occurred after the killing of Pepeng Taga,
and in that meeting Pedro Tigas expressly
admitted to Atty. Chloe in strict confidence
as his lawyer that he had shot Pepeng Taga.
Is Atty. Chloe ethically bound to reveal the
admission of Pedro Tigas to the police
investigator what Pedro Tigas had stated to
her at the Jollibee Restaurant? Explain your
answer. (17 Bar [Legal Ethics] Q2).
A.

a) Yes, Atty. Chloe may reveal to the police
investigator what Pedro Tigas had stated to her
at the Jollibee Restaurant without violating the
confidence of the latter as a client.
The Supreme Court has held that the attorneyclient privilege does not apply to communication
from the client regarding a future crime.
Here at the time Pedro Tigas confided the
assassination to Atty. Chloe, the crime had not yet

733

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

been committed. Hence the same is a future crime
not covered by the attorney-client privilege.
b) No, Atty. Chloe is not ethically bound to reveal the
admission of Pedro Tigas to the police investigator.
Here at the time Pedro Tigas made the
communication, the assassination had already
been committed. Hence the killing is a past crime
covered by the privilege.
Q.

Paredes was haled before the Tanodbayanfor
preliminary investigation of a graft charge under
Section 3(a) of R.A. No. 3019. The Tanodbayan
issued a resolution recommendingthe criminal
prosecutionof Paredes.Atty. Sansaet,as counsel
of Paredes,filed a motion for reconsiderationof
the Tanodbayan resolution attaching thereto a
certificate of arraignmentand dismissal order by
the MCTCof a case involving the same facts as
those in the preliminary investigation. Atty.
Sansaet argued that the filing of the anti-graft
case would amount to double jeopardy.
Subsequently, a criminal case for falsification of
public documentswas filed in the Sandiganbayan
against Honrada(the clerk of court of the MCTC),
Paredes, and Sansaet on the ground that they
conspired in submitting falsified certificate of
arraignment and dismissal order as attachments
to the motion for reconsideration of the
Tanodbayan resolution. Sansaet executed an
affidavit in which he stated that Paredescontrived
to make it appear that the MCTChad dismissed
the case against him after arraignment. The
prosecution moved to discharge Sansaet as a
state witness but this was denied by the SB on
the ground that Sansaet's testimony would be
734

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

blocked by an invocation of the attorney-client
privilege. TheSB statedthat Sansaet'stestimony
would relate to a past crime and hence barred
by the privilege. Was the reasoning of the
Sandiganbayan
correct?
A.

No. In order to determine whether a communication
by a client to an attorney relates to a past or future
crime, the determinative point of time is when the
communication was made, not when the witness
will testify. Although at the time Sansaet would
testify, the falsification of public documents had
already been done, at the time his services were
engaged and the communication made to him, the
falsification was still to be committed. Hence the
communication made to Sansaet of the plan to
submit falsified documents was in relation to a
future crime and outside the pale of the attorneyclient privilege. (People v. Sandiganbayan, 275
SCRA 505 [1997]).

Q.

On August 15, 2008, Edgardo committed estafa
against Petronilo in the amount of P3 Million.
Petronilo brought his complaint to the National
Bureau of Investigation, which found that
Edgardo had visited his lawyer twice, the first
time on August 14, 2008 and the second on
August 16, 2008;and that both visits concerned
the swindling of Petronilo. During the trial of
Edgardo, the RTC issued a subpoena ad
testificandum to Edgardo's lawyer for him to
testify on the conversations during their first
and second meetings. May the subpoena
be quashed on the ground of privileged
communication?Explainfully. (08 Bar Q14)

735

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The subpoena may be quashed as to the 16 August
2008 meeting but not as to the 14 August 2008
meeting. The Supreme Court has held that the
attorney-client privilege applies only to communications
regarding past crimes not to those concerning
future crimes.
Here the 16 August 2008 meeting between
Edgardo and his lawyer concerned the swindling
which had already been committed a day earlier in 15
August 2008. Hence the same concerns a past crime
and is privileged. Of course if the 16 August 2008
meeting between Edgardo and his lawyer was about
advice on how to destroy or conceal evidence of the
swindling, such communication and advice would be
unlawful and not covered by the privilege.
On the other hand, the 14 August 2008
meeting between Edgardo and his lawyer was
about the crime of swindling that would be
committed the next day and hence a future crime
not covered by the attorney-client privilege. Hence
the subpoena may not be quashed insofar as the
14 August 2008 meeting was concerned.

Q.

Sancho Mahilig went to the office of Atty.
Charm to engage her legal representation in the
criminal case for adultery that the husband of
his socialite friend had brought against him in
the City Prosecutor's Office in Manila. Atty.
Charm thoroughly interviewed Sancho in her
office
with only
Linda,
the
secretary/
stenographer of Atty. Charm, the only other
person present. On that occasion, Sancho
candidly informed Atty. Charm about his illicit
affair with the socialite wife, and gave many
details. Linda faithfullyrecorded the interview.
736

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

During the trial of the criminal case for
adultery,the trial prosecutor requestedthe court
to issue a subpoena duces tecum to compel the
production of the record of the interview and a
subpoena ad testificandum to compel Linda to
testify on the admission of the affair by Sancho.
Atty. Charmobjected to the requeston the basis
of lawyer-clientconfidentiality.
If you were the trial judge, how will you
resolve the objection of Atty. Charm? Justify
your answer. (17 Bar [Legal Ethics] Q8A).
A.

If I were the trial judge, I would sustain the objection
of Atty. Charm.
The attorney-client privilege extends to the
attorney's secretary, stenographer, or clerk, who
cannot be examined without the consent of the client
and their employer. (S24[b] R130). Such privilege
covers not only the testimony of the secretary but also
her record of the client interview. (See Upjohn Co. v.
United States, 449 U.S. 383 [1981]).

Q. Does the attorney-client privilege apply if the
client is a corporation?
A.

Yes. (United States v. Louisville & Nashville R. Co.,
236 U.S. 318 [1915). The problem is in determining
who the client exactly is since a corporation is an
artificial creature and an inanimate entity. Under
the "control group test," if the employee making the
communication, of whatever rank he may be, is in a
position to control or even to take a substantial part
in a decision about any action which the
corporation may take upon the advice of the
attorney, then, in effect, he is (or personifies) the
corporation when he makes his disclosure to the

737

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

attorney and the privilege would apply. ( General
Electric Co. v. Kirkpatrick, 312 F.2d 742 [CA]).
Q.

Upjohn Company, an American multinational
pharmaceutical corporation, learned that payments
were made by a foreign subsidiary to foreign
government officials in order to secure business.
Upjohn's general counsel undertook an internal
investigation of the questionable payments and
sent questionnaires to the foreign managers
involved. The responses were sent directly to the
general counsel. The general counsel also made
notes and memorandums regarding the responses
to the interview questions. Upjohn voluntarily
submitted a report to the SEC disclosing the
payments. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
began an investigation to determine the tax
consequences of the payments. The IRS issued a
summons to Upjohn demanding production of the
files relative to its investigation, the questionnaires,
the responses thereto, and the general counsel's
notes and memorandums of the interviews. Upjohn
declined to produce the questionnaires and the
responses thereto on the ground that they were
protected from disclosure by the attorney-client
privilege. The Court of Appeals held that under the
"control group test" the privilege did not apply to
the extent that the communications were made by
officers and agents not responsible for directing
Upjohn's actions in response to legal advice for the
reason that they do not personify the corporationclient. In the case where the client is a corporation,
should the privilege be held to apply only to the
control group, that is, the officers or agents of the
corporationresponsiblefor directingthe corporation's
actions in response to the legal advice?
738

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

No. The control group test overlooks the fact that
the attorney-client privilege exists to protect not
only the giving of professional advice to those who
can act on it but also the giving of information to the
lawyer to enable him to give sound and informed
advice. While in the case of the individual client the
provider of information and the person who acts on
the lawyer's advice are one and the same, in the
corporate context it will frequently be employees
beyond the control group who will possess the
information needed by the corporation's lawyers.
Middle-level and indeed lower-level employees can
by actions within the scope of their employment
embroil the corporation in serious legal difficulties,
and it is only natural that these employees would
have the relevant information needed by corporate
counsel if he is adequately to advise the client with
respect to such actual or potential difficulties.
(Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383). In this
case the U.S. Supreme Court rejected the control
test applied by the Court of Appeals.

Q.

A client furnished his lawyer with documents
regarding a case for the purpose of obtaining
legal advice. The adverse party moved for the
issuance of a subpoena duces tecum to the
lawyer to produce the documents. May the
lawyer invoke the attorney-client privilege to
quash the subpoena?

A.

It depends if the documents while in the hands of
the client were privileged. If they were, the
documents when turned over to the lawyer would
be protected by the attorney-client privilege. Where
the transfer is made for the purpose of obtaining
legal advice, the purposes of the attorney-client
privilege would be defeated unless the privilege is
739

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

applicable. Otherwise clients would be discouraged
from turning over relevant documents to lawyers for
fear of losing the privilege with the result that the
lawyer is unable to render effective legal service.
If on the other hand, there is no pre-existing
privilege in the documents, there is no disincentive
for the clients to hand over the documents to the
attorney and the latter's ability to obtain informed
legal advice will remain unfettered. Hence the
attorney-client privilege would not apply. (Fisher v.
United States, 425 US 391 [1976]).
Q.

A taxpayer, who was under investigation for
possible civil or criminal liability underthe federal
income tax laws, after having obtained from his
accountant certain documents relating to the
accountant's preparation of his tax returns,
transferred the documents to his attorney to
assist the taxpayer in connection with the
investigation.Subsequently,the InternalRevenue
Service served summonses on the attorney
directing him to produce the documents,but the
attorney refusedto comply. The Governmentthen
brought enforcementactions, and, in each case,
the District Court orderedthe summonsenforced.
The lawyer invoked the attorney-client privilege
and the Fifth Amendment (privilege against selfincrimination) in resisting compliance. May the
summons be enforced?

A.

Yes. The test is that if the documents were
privileged in the hands of the client, then they
would be privileged if turned over to the lawyer for
purposes of obtaining legal advice.

740

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Here the taxpayer cannot invoke the Fifth
Amendment since the workpaper's were not private
having been prepared not by the taxpayer but by
his accountant. Hence compelling their production
would not implicate the taxpayer's right against selfincrimination. (Fisher v. United States, 425 US
391 [1976]).
Work-productdoctrine
Q.

What is the work-productdoctrine?

A.

The doctrine that the trial preparation materials of a
lawyer or his representative (e.g., paralegal,
investigator, etc.) are protected from discovery unless
the other party shows that it has a substantial need
for the materials to prepare its case, and cannot,
without undue hardship, obtain their substantial
equivalent by other means. Trial preparation materials
include written documents, such as records, notes,
memorandums, and tangible things. If discovery will
be allowed, the court must protect against disclosure
of the mental impressions, conclusions, opinions, and
legal theories of the lawyer or his representative.
(See Rule 26(b )(3), Federal Rules of Civil Procedure).
The work-product doctrine is also known as the workproduct rule. It is not a privilege but a special
protective rule which limits discovery of an attorney's
work product.

Q.

What is the reason for the work-productdoctrine?

A.

The doctrine protects the attorney's right to work
with a certain degree of privacy in giving legal
advice and in preparing for trial. If the lawyer's trial
preparation materials could be obtained by
discovery, much of what is now put down in writing
would remain unwritten. An attorney's thoughts,
741

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

heretofore inviolate, would not be his own.
Inefficiency, unfairness and sharp practices would
inevitably develop in the giving of legal advice and
in the preparation of cases for trial. The effect on
the legal profession would be demoralizing. And
the interests of the clients and the cause of justice
would be poorly served. (Hickman v. Taylor, 329
U.S. 495 [1942]). The doctrine protects lawyers'
effective trial preparation by immunizing certain
information and materials from discovery.
Q.

Upjohn Company, an American multinational
pharmaceutical corporation, learned that
payments were made by a foreign subsidiary to
foreign government officials in order to secure
business. Upjohn's general counsel undertook
an internal investigation of the questionable
payments and sent questionnaires to the
foreign managersinvolved. The responseswere
sent directly to the general counsel. The general
counsel also made notes and memorandums
regarding the responses to the interview
questions.Upjohn voluntarily submitted a report
to the SEC disclosing the payments. The
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) began an
investigatiooto . determinethe tax consequences
of the payments.The IRS issued a summons to
Upjohn demanding production of the files
relative to its investigation, the questionnaires,
the responsesthereto,and the generalcounsel's
notes and memorandums of the interviews.
Upjohn declined to produce the notes and
memorandumsof the interviews on the ground
that these were protected by the attorney-client
privilege and these were attorney work-product
prepared in anticipation of litigation. The Court

742

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

of Appeals held that the notes and memorandums
constituted attorney work-productbut these
may be obtained by discovery since the
government showed that it had a substantial
need for the materials and it could not
otherwise obtain the same without undue
hardship. Are the notes and memorandums
protected by the attorney-client privilege and
the attorney work-product doctrine?
A.

Insofar as the notes and memorandums of the
interviews record responses to the questionnaires,
the same are protected under the attorney-client
privilege. Where they go beyond the mere
recordation of the responses, the same would be
covered by the work-product doctrine.
It should be noted that the work-product
doctrine has two tiers. The first tier consists of trial
preparation materials which do not constitute the
mental impressions, conclusions, opinions, and
legal theories of the lawyer. The second consists
of those which do. While a showing of "substantial
need" and "undue hardship" would override the
protection accorded under the first tier, that would
not hold true in respect of the second tier which are
absolutely protected from disclosure. Here the
notes and memorandums reveal the general
counsel's mental processes in evaluating the
interview responses and as such tend to fall in the
second tier. The U.S. Supreme Court remanded the
case to the Court of Appeals to determine in what
tier the communications fall within. (Upjohn Co. v.
United States, 449 U.S. 383 [1981]).

743

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

A tugboat owned by Speedy Port Service, Inc.
(SPS) sank in Manila Bay while helping tow
another vessel, drowning five (5) of the crew in
the resulting shipwreck. At the maritime board
inquiry, the four (4) survivors testified. SPS
engaged Atty. Ely to defend it against potential
claims and to sue the company owning the
other vessel for damages to the tug. Ely
obtained signed statements from the survivors.
He also interviewed other persons, in some
instances making memoranda.The heirs of the
five (5) victims filed an action for damages
against SPS.
Plaintiffs'counsel sent written interrogatories
to Ely, asking whether statements of witnesses
were obtained; if written, copies were to be
furnished; if oral, the exact provisionswere to be
set forth in detail. Ely refusedto comply, arguing
that the documents and information asked are
privileged communication. Is the contention
tenable?Explain.(08Bar Q20)115

A.

Atty. Ely's contention is tenable in part. His argument
that the documents and information are privileged
communication is correct insofar as those coming
from the crew members are concerned but not
correct with respect to those coming from witnesses
who are not crew members. Nonetheless the
documents and information coming from the latter
are still protected from disclosure pursuant to the
work-product doctrine.

11

5The

facts of the bar question are based on the U.S. case of Hickman v.
Taylor, 329 U.S. 495 (1947), the case which originatedthe work-productdoctrine.

744

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

The written and oral statements he obtained
from the surviving crew members are protected
under the attorney-client privilege.
Where the client is a corporation,the attorneyclient privilege extends to the employees of the
company and thus their communications to the
attorneyfor the purposeof enablinghim to give sound
and informed advice are considered privileged.
(Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383 [1981])
Hence the written and oral statements of the
survivors, who are crewmembers and thus
employees of SPS, are privilegedfrom discovery.
Atty. Ely's memoranda of his interview of
other witnesses who are not crewmembers, their
written statements obtained by him, and his
recollection of what they said to him are not
protected by the attorney-client privilege since the
witnesses are not employees of Atty. Ely's clients.
Nonetheless such memoranda, written statements
and his recollections of their oral statements are
not discoverable pursuant to the work-product
doctrine which protects from discovery a lawyer's
trial preparation materials. (Hickman v. Taylor, 329
U.S. 495 [1947]).
Hence while Atty. Ely's argument that the
documents and information are not privileged is
not entirely correct, his refusal to comply with the
written interrogatories is justified.
Q.

Distinguish the attorney-client privilege from
the work-product doctrine.

745

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
ATTORNEY-CLIENT
PRIVILEGE

WORK-PRODUCT
DOCTRINE

A privilege.

Not a privilege but a special
protective rule against
discovery.

Based on confidential
communication between
client and attorney.

Extends to all trial preparation
material of the lawyer even if
not based on attorney-client
communication.

May not be overcome by a
showing of "substantial need"
and "undue hardship."

May be overcome by a
showing of "substantial need"
and "undue hardship."

Applies broadly at all stages
of legal proceedings.

Operates primarily as a
limitation on
pre-trial discovery.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 71 [2004

ed.]).

Q.

May the work-product doctrine be invoked in
the Philippines?

A.

While the work-product doctrine is not expressly
recognized in Philippine law and jurisprudence, it is
submitted that it may be invoked in the Philippines
pursuant to 816 R23 on motion for protective
orders or to 818 R23 on motion to terminate or limit
examination. Similar provisions in the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure were cited by the U.S.
Supreme Court in Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495
( 194 7), in laying down the work-product doctrine.

746

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

In an obiter dictum in Fortune Corp. v. Court of
Appeals, 229 SCRA 355, 372 (1994), the Supreme
Court stated that a bare allegation of the "work
product doctrine" is not sufficient to grant a motion
for protective and limiting orders, thereby implying
that such orders would be forthcoming if there
is sufficient showing of the applicability of
the doctrine.116
PHYSICIAN/PSYCHOTHERAPIST -PATIENT PRIVILEGE
Q.

Discuss the physician/psychotherapist-patient
privilege.

A.

A physician, psychotherapist or person reasonably
believed by the patient to be authorized to practice
medicine or psychotherapy cannot in a civil case,
without the patient's consent, be examined as to
any confidential communication made for the
purpose of diagnosis or treatment of the patient's
physical, mental or emotional condition, including
alcohol or drug addiction, between the patient and
his physician or psychotherapist.This privilege also
applies to persons, including members of the
patient's family, who have participated in the
diagnosis or treatment of the patient under the
direction of the physician or psychotherapist.117
(S24[c] R130, 2020 Rules of Evidence).

Q.

Who is a psychotherapist?

A.

A psychotherapistis:
116See

also Santamaria v Cleary, 793 SCRA 459, 477 (2016),
that the requirement under the former rule that the information would
"blacken the patient's reputation" has been deleted in the amended provision, Also
the privilege has been extended to psychotherapists and their patients,
117Note

747

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a)

A person licensed to practice medicine
engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of a
mental or emotional condition, or

b)

A person licensed as a psychologist b~ the
government while similarly engaged. (ld.).1 8

Q.

In a torts case filed by plaintiff against the
defendant, may the plaintiff's doctor, over the
plaintiff's objection, be called by the defense to
testify regarding the extent of the plaintiff's
broken leg which the doctor treated?

A.

No, upon objection that it would violate the
physician-patient
privilege.
While
information
regarding the plaintiff's broken leg would not
blacken his reputation, the requirement regarding
the blackening of the reputation was deleted in the
2020 Rules on Evidence.

Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage
against her husband Panibugho and his
paramour Kalunya. May the court allow or give
weight to the following evidence presented by
the prosecution over the vigorous objectionsof
the defense? Explain.
xxx
(c) Testimony of Dr. Mediko, the obstetrician
who conducted a dilation and curettage (D &
C) operation on Kalunya for vaginal bleeding
1181f

a psychotherapist is licensed as a psychologist, he would also be
governed by R.A. No. 10029 or the Philippine Psychology Act of 2009. Section
30 of R.A. No. 10029 provides for a psychologist-patient privilege. There are
differences between Sec. 30 of R.A. No. 10029 and S24(c) R130, for instance
the psychologist-patient privilege applies in criminal or administrative
proceedings. In case of conflict it is submitted that the provisions of S24(c) R130
would prevail being the special law.

748

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

and to whom confidential information
essential for treatmentwas given by Kalunya
regarding her affair with Panibugho.
(86 Bar Q1 Oc).
A.

Yes, the court may allow the testimony of Dr.
Mediko.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the physicianpatient privilege applies only to civil cases.
Here what is involved is a criminal prosecution
for concubinage. Hence Dr. Mediko's testimony
is admissible.

Q.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged
from her husband Walter becauseof the latter's
suspicion that she was having an affair with
Vladimir, a barangay kagawad who lived in
nearby Mandaluyong. Nenita lived in the
meantimewith her sister in Makati.One day, the
house of Nenita's sister inexplicably burned
almost to the ground. Nenitaand her sisterwere
caught inside the house but Nenita survived as
she fled in time, while her sister tried to save
belongings and was caught inside when the
house collapsed. As she was running away
from the burning house, Nenita was surprised
to see her husband also running away from the
scene. Dr. Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist who
lived near the burned house and whom Walter
medically consulted after the fire, also saw
Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the
fire. Coincidentally, Fr. Platino, the parish priest
who regularly hears Walter's confession and
who heard it after the fire, also encounteredhim
not too far away from the burned house. Walter
749

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

was charged with arson and at his trial, the
prosecution moved to introduce the testimonies
of Nenita, the doctor and the priest-confessor,
who all saw Walter at the vicinity of the fire at
about the time of the fire.
a) xxx
b) May the testimony of Dr. Carlos, Walter's
psychiatrist, be allowed over Walter's
objection? (13 Bar Q9b).
c) xxx
A.
b) Yes the testimony of Dr. Carlos may be allowed
over Walter's objection since the physicianpatient privilege applies only to civil cases.
Moreover, Dr. Carlos' testimony involved a fact
which he did not acquire in his professional
capacity but as an ordinary witness.

Q. Are autopsiesconductedby medico-legalofficers
or coroners covered by the privilege?
A.

No, since there is no patient or treatment involved, the
autopsy having been conducted on a dead person.

Q. Mrs. X was examined by a psychiatrist and
diagnosed to be suffering from schizophrenia.
Later Mr.. X filed a petition for the annulmentof
his marriage to Mrs. X. During the trial, the
psychiatristwas called as an expertwitness. She
was asked questions to qualify her as a witness,
she was asked to render an opinion as to what
illness the drug stelazine is prescribedfor, she
was asked to render an opinion on hypothetical
facts respecting the behavior of a fictitious
750

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

person, and finally she testified that she saw and
treated Mrs. X but without revealing her illness,
the result of the examination,and the medicines
prescribed. Did the psychiatrist's testimony
violate the physician-patientprivilege?
A.

No. An attending physician may testify as an expert
witness provided his opinion is based strictly upon
the hypothetical facts stated, excluding and
disregarding any personal knowledge of the patient
acquired through the physician-patient relationship.
(Lim v. Court of Appeals, 214 SCRA273 [1992]).

Q.

Petitioner wife filed a petition with the Family
Court for the declaration of the nullity of her
marriage to her Respondent husband on the
ground of the latter's psychological incapacity.
During the pre-trial, Petitioner filed a request
for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum
addressed to the hospital covering the
Respondent'srecords for alleged drug-addiction
treatmentand rehabilitation. Respondent'slawyer
objects to the motion invoking the physicianpatient privilege. Petitioner's lawyer retorts that
the objection is prematureas the records are not
yet being offered in evidenceand, assumingthat
the objection is not premature,that the physicianpatient privilege bars only testimonial evidence
since it refers only to the disqualification of the
physician to testify on a matter learned in
confidence but does not otherwise bar the
productionof documentaryevidence.How should
the court ruleon Respondent'sobjection? Explain.

A.

The court should sustain Respondent's objection.

751

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The Petitioner's application for issuance of
subpoena is premature. She should wait for the
trial before making a request for the issuance of
subpoena duces tecum.
It is of course possible to treat Petitioner's
motion for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum
covering the hospital records as a motion for
production of documents under R27, a discovery
procedure available to a litigant prior to trial.!" In
such a case, the argument of Petitioner's lawyer that
the objection is premature would be without merit.
Under S1 R27, documents which are privileged
may not be the subject of a motion for production.
Here the documents subject of a motion for
production were covered by the physician-patient
privilege. Hence the adverse party (Respondent)
may object to the motion on the ground that the
documents sought to be produced are privileged and
may not be the subject of a motion for production.
The argument of Petitioner's lawyer that the
physician-patient privilege bars only testimonial
evidence is without merit. The physician-patient
privilege bars not only the physician's testimony on
the confidential information but also the documents
embodying such confidential information. To compel
the physician to disclose such records would in
effect be to compel him to testify against the patient.
119This

statement of the court is incorrect. A motion for production under
R27 can be directed only against a party. The hospital and/or the physicians
were not party to the marriage nullification case. The appropriate procedure for
Petitioner to follow is to depose the physicians, ask them regarding the existence
of the documents, and then move for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum
against the physicians or hospital to produce the documents. (See Hickman v.
Taylor, 329 U.S. 495, 504). Of course in such a case, the patient could invoke
the physician-patient privilege with respect to privileged documents as privileges
may be raised during the discovery stage.

752

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Here the documents embody the confidential
information on Respondent's drug rehabilitation
obtained by the physician. Hence the same are
also barred under the physician-patient privilege.
(Chan v. Chan, 24 July 2013).
PSYCHOLOGIST/PSYCHOMETRICIAN-CLIENT
PRIVILEGE (530 RA 10029)
Q.

Discuss the psychologist/psychometrician-client
privilege.

A. A psychologist or psychometrician cannot, without
the consent of the client/patient, be examined on
any communication or information disclosed and/or
acquired in the course of giving psychological
services to such client. The protection accorded
herein shall extend to all pertinent records and shall
be available to the secretary, clerk, or other staff of
the licensed psychologist or psychometrician. Any
evidence obtained in violation of this provision shall
be inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding.
(830 R.A. No. 10029).
Note that the privilegeapplies in any proceeding,
civil, criminal or administrative. Compare to the
physician/psychotherapist-patient privilege which
applies only to civil cases.
PRIEST'S/MINISTER'S PRIVILEGE
Q.

Discuss the priest's/minister'sprivilege.

A. A minister, priest or person reasonably believed to
be so cannot, without the consent of the affected
person, be examined as to any communication or
confession made to or any advice given by him, in

753

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

his professional character, in the course of the
discipline enjoined by the church to which the
minister or priest belongs. (S24[d] R130, as
amended by the 2020 Rules on Evidence).
Q.

A priest was giving spiritual counseling to a
married couple with marital problems. During
the course of the counseling,the wife confessed
that she was having an affair with another man.
In a subsequent marriage nullity suit, may
the priest testify over the wife's objection about
her affair?

A.

No. S24(d) R130 as amended by the 2020 Rules
on Evidence expanded the privilege not only to
confessions but to other communications made to
the priest or minister. The priest here was acting in
his professional character when giving spiritual
advice to the married couple.

Q.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged
from her husband Walter becauseof the latter's
suspicion that she was having an affair with
Vladimir, a barangay kagawad who lived in
nearby Mandaluyong. Nenita lived in the
meantimewith her sister in Makati.One day, the
house of Nenita's sister inexplicably burned
almost to the ground. Nenitaand her sister were
caught inside the house but Nenitasurvived as
she fled in time, while her sister tried to save
belongings and was caught inside when the
house collapsed. As she was running away
from the burning house, Nenita was surprised
to see her husband also running away from the
scene. Dr. Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist who
lived near the burned house and whom Walter
medically consulted after the fire, also saw
754

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the
fire. Coincidentally, Fr. Platino, the parish priest
who regularly hears Walter's confession and
who heard it after the fire, also encounteredhim
not too far away from the burned house. Walter
was charged with arson and at his trial, the
prosecution moved to introduce the testimonies
of Nenita, the doctor and the priest-confessor,
who all saw Walter at the vicinity of the fire at
about the time of the fire.
a)

xxx

b)

xxx

c) May the testimony of Fr. Platino, the priestconfessor, be allowed over Walter's
objection? (13 Bar Q9c).
A.
c) Fr. Platino's testimony that he encountered
Walter not too far away from the burned house
may be allowed over Walter's objection. Under
the Rules of Evidence, the priest's/minister's
privilege applies only to a communication or
confession made to or advice given by the
priest in his professional character. Evidently Fr.
Platino was not acting in his professional
character when he encountered Walter.
Fr. Platino however may not testify regarding
Walter's confession over his objection that the
same is covered by the priest's/minister's privilege.

755

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

PUBLIC INTEREST PRIVILEGE
Q.

Discuss the public interest privilege.

A.

A public officer cannot be examined during or after
his tenure, as to communications made to him in
official confidence, when the court finds that the
public interest would suffer by the disclosure.
(S24[e] R130).

Q.

Banco Filipino filed a motion under Rule 27 of
the Rules of Court for the production of the
tapes and the transcripts of the Monetary Board
deliberations on the closure of Banco Filipino.
The MB opposed said motion on the ground
that these tapes and transcripts are privileged
pursuant to the public interest privilege under
the Rules of Evidence. Is the MB's opposition
meritorious?

A.

No. Under Section 24(e) of Rule 130, the public
interest privil_ege_ would arise if the court finds that
the public interest would suffer by the disclosure.
The MB has not established that public interest
would suffer by the disclosure. Considering that BF
had already been closed by the Central Bank, any
disclosure of the tapes and transcripts would pose
no danger or peril to the economy. (Banco Filipino
v. Monetary Board, 142 SCRA 523 [19861).120

12The
ruling is highly arguable. The reasoning that public interest would
not suffer because BF had already been closed is somewhat narrow and takes
an ex post approach to the privilege. It ignores the ex ante perspective of the
privilege. One of the public interests sought to be protected is the free and
unfettered discussions during deliberations. Disclosure of the deliberations would
clearly have a chilling effect on such discussions.

756

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Executive Privilege
Q.

What is executive privilege?

A.

It is the privilege which protects the confidentiality of
conversations that take place in the President's
performance of his official duties. The privilege may
be invoked not only by the President but also by his
close advisors under the "operational proximity"
test. (Neri v. Senate Committee on Accountability of
Public Officers and Investigations, G.R. No.
180643, 25 March 2008).

Q.

The Senate sought to question Mr. Romulo Neri,
a member of President Arroyo's cabinet, on
whether President Arroyo followed up the
National Broadband Network project (financed
by Chinese loans), whether she directed him to
prioritize it, and whether she directed him to
approve it. Mr. Neri invoked executive privilege
stating that his conversationswith the President
dealt with delicate and sensitive national
security and diplomatic matters relating to the
impact of the scandal on high government
officials and the possible loss of confidence by
foreign investors and lenders. May Mr. Neri's
invocationof executive privilegebe upheld?

A.

Yes. The Supreme Court upheld Mr. Neri's invocation
of executive privilege (more specifically the presidential
communications privilege) stating that disclosure might
impair our diplomatic as well as economic relations
with China. The SC distinguished this from U.S. v.
Nixon, where there was an ongoing criminal
investigation into the Watergate break-in. (Neri v.
Senate Committee on Accountability of Public Officers
and Investigations, G.R. No. 180643, 25 March 2008)

757

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

On May 23, 2005, the Committee on Tariff and
Related Matters (CTRM), an office under the
National Economic Development Authority
(NEDA), held a meeting in which it resolved to
recommend to President Gloria MacapagalArroyo the lifting of the suspension of the tariff
reduction schedule on petrochemicals and
certain plastic products, thereby reducing the
Common Effective PreferentialTariff (CEPT)rates
on products covered by ExecutiveOrder No. 161
from 7% or 10% to 5% starting July 2005. On
June 9, 2005, Wilfredo A. Paras, then the
Chairman of the Association of Petrochemical
Manufacturers of the Philippines (APMP), the
main industry association in the petrochemical
sector, wrote to the CTRMSecretariat,through itsDirector Brenda Mendoza,to request a copy of
the minutes of the meeting held on May 23, 2005.
Director Mendozadeniedthe request.The attitude
of the CTRM prompted the petitioner and the
APMP to bring the petition for mandamus in the
RTCto compel the CTRMto provide the copy of
the minutes and to grant access to the minutes,
invoking the constitutional right to informationon
matters of public concern and the State's policy
of full public disclosure. May the CTRM be
compelledto provide the copy of the minutes and
to grant accessto the minutes?

A.

No. The right to information does not extend to
matters acknowledged as privileged information
under the separation of powers, which include
Presidential conversations, correspondences, or
discussions during closed door Cabinet meetings.
A President and those who assist him must be free
to explore alternatives in the process of shaping
758

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

policies and making decisions and to do so in a
way many would be unwilling to express except
privately. It was imperative to ensure and promote
the free exchange of ideas among the members of
the committee tasked to give tariff recommendations
to the President were truly imperative. ( Sereno v.
Committee on Tariff and Related Matters, 1
February 2016, Bersamin, J.).
Deliberative Process Privilege
Q.

What is the deliberative process privilege?

A.

The deliberative process privilege protects from
disclosure advisory opinions, recommendations, and
deliberations comprising part of a process by which
governmental decisions and policies are formulated.
Written advice from a variety of individuals is an
important element of the government's decisionmaking process and the interchange of advice could
be stifled if courts forced the government to disclose
those recommendations; thus, the privilege is
intended to prevent the "chilling" of deliberative
communications. (Department of Foreign Affairs v.
BCA InternationalCorp., 29 June 2016, Carpio, J.).
An example would be court deliberations and court
sessions. (Id.).

Q.

In an Amended Build-Operate-Transfer Agreement
(Agreement), the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA) awarded the Machine Readable Passport
and Visa Project (MRPN Project) to BCA
International Corporation (BCA), a domestic
corporation. During the implementation of the
MRPN Project, DFA sought to terminate the
Agreement. However, BCA opposed the termination
and filed a Request for Arbitration, according to a

759

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

provision in the Agreement. An ad hoc arbitral
tribunal was constituted. BCA filed before the
RTC a Petition for Assistance in Taking Evidence
pursuant to the Implementing Rules and
Regulations (IRR) of the Alternative Dispute
Resolution Act of 2004 (RA 9285). In its petition,
BCA sought the issuance of subpoena ad
testificandum and subpoena duces tecum to
witnesses and documents in the DFA's custody.
The DFA opposed the issuance of subpoenason
the ground that the witnessesand the documents
sought related to deliberationsby the DFA on the
award of the MRPNProjectand would thus violate
the deliberative process privilege. The RTC
grantedthe applicationfor issuanceof subpoenas.
According to the RTC, acts, transactions or
decisions are privileged only before a definite
proposition is reached by the agency and since
DFA had already made a definite proposition and
enteredinto a contract, DFA'sacts, transactionsor
decisions were no longer privileged.Was the RTC
correct in its reason for not applying the
deliberativeprocessprivilege?
A.

No. The privileged character of the information does
not end when an agency has adopted a definite
proposition or when a contract has been perfected
or consummated; otherwise, the purpose of the
privilege will be defeated. The deliberative process
privilege applies if its purpose is served, that is, to
protect the frank exchange of ideas and opinions
critical to the government's decision-making
process where disclosure would discourage such
discussion in the future. The question is not
whether the decision has been implemented, or
whether sufficient time has passed, but whether
760

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

disclosure of these preliminary proposals could
harm the agency's future decision-making by
chilling either the submission of such proposals or
their forthright consideration. (Department of
Foreign Affairs v. BCA International Corp., 29 June
2016, Carpio, J.).
Q.

If a privileged communication falls into the
hands of a third person, will the communication
still remain privileged?

A.

Yes. The communication shall remain privileged,
even in the hands of a third person who may have
obtained the information, provided that the original
parties to the communication took reasonable
precaution to protect its confidentiality. (S24 R130,
2020 Rules on Evidence). This is a significant new
provision in the 2020 Rules which overrides
previous rulings that the communication shall lose
its privileged character if it falls into the hands of a
third person.
The communicationshall also remain privileged
if there was collusion between one of the parties to
the privileged communication and the third party.
(People v. Carlos, 47 Phil. 626).

Informant's Privilege
Q.

Is the name and identity of an informant on a
suspect in the crime of terrorism confidential?

A.

Yes. Under Section 51 of the Human Security Act,
the name and identity of an informant on a suspect
in the crime of terrorism shall be considered
confidential and shall not be unnecessarily revealed
until after the proceedings against the suspect shall
have been terminated.
761

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Media Practitioner's Privilege
Q.

What is the Media Practitioner'sPrivilege?

A.

Without prejudice to his liability under the civil and
criminal laws, any publisher, owner, or duly
recognized or accredited journalist, writer, reporter,
contributor, opinion writer, editor, columnist,
manager, media practitioner involved in the writing,
editing, production, and dissemination of news for
mass circulation, of any print, broadcast, wire
service organization, or electronic mass media,
including cable TV and its variants, cannot be
compelled to reveal the source of any news item,
report or information appearing or being reported or
disseminated through said media, which was
related in confidence to the abovementionedmedia
practitioners. (R.A. No. 11458)."

Q.

Is the privilegesubject to an exception?

A. Yes. Revelation can be compelled if a court, or the
House of Representatives, or the Senate or any
committee of Congress finds that such revelation is
demanded by the security of the State. (Id.)."
Q.

What is the purpose of the privilege?

A.

The privilege serves to advance the public's right
to information by encouraging informants to
disclose information to media practitioners.Without
the privilege, informants would be reluctant
to communicate information for fear of reprisal
or harassment.

762

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Privilege against self-incrimination
Q.

What is the privilegeagainst self-incrimination?

A.

It is a constitutional privilege which provides that no
person shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself. (Art. 111, Section 17, Constitution).

Q.

In what proceedings may the privilege be invoked?

A.

The privilege may be invoked not only in criminal
cases, but in civil, administrative, and legislative
proceedings wherein the person may be exposed
to a liability which is penal in nature.
Hence the
privilege may be invoked in an administrative
proceeding where a doctor's license may be
cancelled (Pascual v. Board of Medical Examiners,
28 SCRA 345) or where a person's property may
be forfeited pursuant to proceedings under the AntiGraft Law (Cabal v. Kapunan, 6 SCRA 1064).

Q.

What is the nature of the evidence which is
excluded by the privilege?

A.

The
privilege
excludes
evidence
which
is
testimonial in nature. This is clear from the tenor of
the Constitutional provision which provides that
"[n]o person shall be compelled to be a witness
against himself." (Italics supplied). Hence it cannot
be invoked to bar documentary or object evidence.
In other words a person can be compelled to
produce evidence, not privileged, for use against
him, except that he may not be compelled to testify
against himself.

Q.

May a court compel a person to provide blood
and other bodilysamples for purposesof DNA or

763

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

forensic testing over the person's objection that it
will violate his right against self-incrimination?
A.

Yes. The privilege against self-incrimination applies
only to testimonial compulsion. Hence it is not
applicable to the case where a person is directed to
produce blood and other bodily samples, (People v.
Yatar, G.R. No. 150224, 19 May 2004), or to submit to
a physical examination (People v. Gallardo, G.R. No.
133025, 27 February 2000), or to undergo ultra-violet
examination to detect fluorescent powder dusted on
the buy-bust money (People v. Tranca, 35 SCRA 455).

Q.

Accused police officer was arrested for extortion
after an entrapmentoperation. He was compelled
to undergo a drug test by submitting his urine
sample. The urine sample tested positive for
drugs. Accused was convicted of the crime of use
of dangerous drugs under Section 15, Art. II of the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act (R.A.
9165).He challenged the admissibilty of the urine
sample on the ground that his drug testing
violated his right against self-incrimination. Was
the urine sample properly admitted in evidence?

A.

No. The drug testing violated the accused's right
against self-incrimination. The drug test in Section
15 of RA 9165 covers only those arrested for crimes
under Art. II of RA 9165. Here the accused was
arrested for extortion not for dangerous drug use.
The rule is that the right against selfincrimination is a prohibition against testimonial
compulsion. Cases where non-testimonial compulsion
has been allowed reveal, however, that the pieces
of evidence obtained were all material to the

principal cause of the arrest.
764

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

In the instant case, a urine sample is
immaterial to the charge of extortion. It is thus
erroneous to hold that the extraction of petitioner's
urine for purposes of drug testing was "merely a
mechanical act, hence, falling outside the concept
of a custodial investigation." (Dela Cruz v. People,
730 SCRA 655 [20141).
Q.

May a person resist a subpoena for the
production of private books and papers to be
used against him on the ground that it would
violate the privilege against self-incrimination?

A.

It depends on whether the private books and papers
contain testimonial declarations of the person
asserting the privilege. If they do, then the privilege
may be invoked for to compel the person to produce
the books and papers is tantamount to compelling
him to testify against himself.
On the other hand if the books and papers,
even if private, do not contain testimonial
declarations, then the privilege may not be invoked.
The privilege applies only to testimonial compulsion
not to a compulsion to produce evidence. (See
Fisher v. United States, 425 US 391 [1976]; cf.
Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616 [18861).121

Q.

A taxpayer, who was under investigation for
possible civil or criminal liability under the
federal income tax laws, obtained from his
accountantworkpapersrelatingto the accountant's
preparation of his tax returns. May the taxpayer

121Testimonial
declarations have been defined as "statements that were made
under circumstances which would lead an objective witness reasonably to believe that
the statement would be available for use at a later trial." (See Crawford v. Washington,
541 U.S. 36 [2004]). Testimonial statements means statements wherein the person
making them knows that they can or may be used in court.

765

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

be compelled by subpoena to deliver to
the court the workpapers despite the taxpayer's
invocationof the privilegeagainstself-incrimination?

A.

Yes. The privilege against self-incrimination applies
only to testimonial compulsion. A subpoena served
on a taxpayer requiring him to produce an
accountant's workpapers in his possession without
doubt involves substantial compulsion. But it does
not compel oral testimony; nor would it ordinarily
compel the taxpayer to restate, repeat, or affirm the
truth of the contents of the documents sought.
Therefore, the Fifth Amendment would not be
violated by the fact alone that the papers, on their
face, might incriminate the taxpayer, for the privilege
protects a person only against being incriminated by
his own compelled testimonial communications. The
accountant's workpapers are not the taxpayer's.
They were not prepared by the taxpayer, and they
contain no testimonial declarations by him. (Fisher v.
United States, 425 US 391 [1976]).
Note: Fisher undercuts the "privacy" test of
Boyd. The clear implication in Fisher is that the
production of papers or documents, even if private,
may be compelled if these do not contain any
testimonial declarations or evidence. Testimonial
evidence is an assertion by an individual of the
truth or falsity of a fact. (1 WIGMORE, EVIDENCE
 24, 25 at 396-401 [3d ed. 1940]).

Q.

May a person be compelled to write on paper in
order to produce a handwriting sample for use
in evidence against him?

A.

No. Writing is more than moving the body, it is not
a purely mechanical act but requires the application

766

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

of the intelligence and attention. In effect a person
is compelled to make evidence against himself and
this violates his right against self-incrimination.
(Beltran v. Samson, 50 Phil. 570 [19291).
Beltran went so far as to state that a person may
not be compelled to produce previously handwritten
documents (handwriting exemplars) to be used in
evidence against him but this part of the ruling is
arguable. In the United States, a person may be
compelled to produce handwriting exemplars without
infringing upon the Fifth Amendment. ( Gilbert v.
California, 388 U.S. 263, [19671).
Q.

When may a person invoke the privilege?

A.

In the case of an accused, he may invoke the
privilege at the outset and refuse to take the witness
stand altogether. Hence an accused cannot be
compelled to testify, either by the prosecution or
during his turn to present evidence. A witness who
is not the accused however may not refuse to take
the witness stand and he can invoke the privilege
only when an incriminatory question is asked of him.

Parental & Filial Privilege
Q.

Discuss the parental and filial privilege.

A.

No person shall be compelled to testify against his
parents, other direct ascendants, children or other
direct descendants, except when such testimony is
indispensable in a crime against that person or by
one parent against the other. (825 R130, 2020
Rules on Evidence). The italicized exceptive clause
was added by the 2020 amendments.

767

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The parental privilege refers to the privilege of
the parent or other direct ascendant while the
filial privilege refers to that of the children or other
direct descendant.
Q.

Who can invoke the parental and filial privilege?

A.

Note that the privilege is invoked not by the person
against whom a witness will testify but by the
witness himself. In other words, under these
privileges a witness may not be compelled to testify
against another. This is an exception to the general
rule that a witness may be compelled to testify
against another.

Q.

The prosecution presents as witness the accused's
son. May the accused object to the presentation of
the son on the basis of the filial privilege?

A.

No. The privilege belongs to the witness himself not
to the party in a case. If the son chooses to testify
against the father, the latter cannot do anything about
it. The child may opt not to testify against his father
but the option is with him not the father.

Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage
against her husband Panibugho and his
paramour Kalunya. May the court allow or give
weight to the following evidence presented by
the prosecution over the vigorous objections of
the defense? Explain.

xxx
(b) Testimony of Matanda, Panibugho's mother,
who is angry at her son for his immoral
behavior. (86 Bar Q10b).
A.

The court may allow the testimony of Matanda.

768

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Under the Rules of Evidence, the filial privilege
belongs to the witness, not to the party in a case.
While Matanda cannot be compelled to testify
against her son, she cannot be barred from
testifying if she wants to.
Q.

May a stepmother be compelled
against her stepdaughter?

to testify

A.

Yes. The parental privilege does not apply since the
same covers only direct ascendants and direct
descendants, and a stepdaughter is not a direct
descendant of the stepmother. (Lee v. Court of
Appeals, 13 July 2010, Abad, J.)

Trade Secrets Privilege
Q.

What is the trade secrets privilege?

A.

A person cannot be compelled to testify about any
trade secret, unless the non-disclosure will conceal
fraud or otherwise work injustice. When disclosure is
directed, the court shall take such protective measure
as the interest of the owner of the trade secret and of
the parties and the furtherance of justice may require.
(S26 R130). This is a new provision introduced by
the 2020 Rules and which was based on the case of
Air Philippines Corp. v. Pennswe/1 Inc., G.R. No.
172835, 13 December 2007.

Q.

Air Philippines Corporation (APC) purchased
chemical lubricants from Pennswell, a company
that manufactures and sells aviation lubricants.
Pennswell sued APC for unpaid purchases. In
its answer, APC alleged that Pennswell had
undertaken to deliver lubricants of the type
belonging to a new line, but that the second
batch of lubricants delivered turned out to be of
769

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the same type as the first batch. APC wanted to
prove fraud by showing the courtthe chemical
composition of Pennswell's lubricants. During
trial, it filed a motion under Rule 27 to compel
Pennswell to give a detailed list of the chemical
ingredients and composition of their lubricants.
Pennswell objected, claiming that the list
constitutes trade secrets which it could not be
forced to divulge. It argued that its products are
specialized lubricants, and if their components
were revealed, its business competitors could
easily imitate and market the same types of
products. May Pennswell be compelled under
Rule 27 to disclose the chemical ingredients
and composition of its lubricants?
A.

No. While under Rule 27, a party may move for an
order requiring the production or inspection of
objects or tangible things, such objects or things
must not be privileged. Here the chemical
composition and ingredients of the lubricants are
trade secrets. A trade secret is "a secret formula or
process not patented, but known only to certain
individuals using it in compounding some article of
trade having a commercial value." Trade secrets
are privileged matter whose disclosure is
proscribed and penalized under the Securities
Regulation Code and under the Revised Penal
Code. The chemical ingredients and composition of
the aviation lubricants of Pennswell clearly fall
within the definition of trade secrets and are thus
privileged. (Air Philippines Corp. v. Pennswe/1 /nc.,
G.R. No. 172835, 13 December2007).

Under the 2020 Rules on Evidence, disclosure may
be compelled under the fraud exception but the court
shall take protectice measures.

770

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

EXTRAJU DICIAL ADMISSIONS
Q.

What is an admission by a party-opponent?

A.

It is an act, declaration, or omission of a party as to
a relevant fact and which may be given in evidence
against him. It is also called a party admission or
admission by party-opponent. (FRE 801 [d][2]).

Q.

What is the reason for the rule that a party's
admissionmay be given in evidence against him?

A.

The admissibility of a party admission does not rest
upon the fact that it is against the interest of the
party but upon the adversary theory of litigation. A
party can hardly object that he had no opportunity
to cross-examine himself or that he is unworthy of
credence save when speaking under the sanction
of an oath. (Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. No. 14671015, 3 April 2001 ).
The use of the word "admission" is somewhat
misleading, implying that the act, declaration, or
omission must be "harmful" or against the party's
interest. This is not the case however. The mere
fact that the act, declaration, or omission is being
offered against the party who made it would already
constitute this as a party admission. In this aspect,
a party admission must be distinguished from a
declaration against interest which requires that the
same is against the declarant's interest.122
To illustrate, Defendant's statement that he
had paid his debt to the Plaintiff is not against

122Many
authors state that party admissions must be against the party's
interest. This is not altogether correct, although it may be said that the fact that the
act, declaration, or omission is being offered against a party would in a sense make
them "against interest." (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 187).

771

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Defendant's interest but is in fact favorable to him.
Plaintiff may however introduce it in evidence to
prove that there was indeed a loan contract
between him and the Defendant.
Q.

If the act, declaration, or omission is being
offered in favor of a party, are they admissible
in evidence?

A.

No since they would be self-serving and hearsay.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 187
[2004 ed.]). Self-serving statements are those
made by a party out of court advocating -his own
interest. (People v. Omictin, 29 July 2010). They
cannot be characterized as admissions of a party
for they are not given in evidence against him but
for him. They are inadmissible on the ground of
hearsay unless independently relevant or within a
hearsay exception.

Q.

What is the difference between a confession
and an admission?

A.

A
confession
is
one wherein
acknowledges the guilt of a crime.
broader form of an admission.

Q.

Distinguish an extrajudicial admission from a
judicial admission.

a
person
It is just a

A.
EXTRAJUDICIAL
ADMISSION

JUDICIAL ADMISSION

Made outside of the
proceedings in the same case.

Made in the course of the
proceedings in the
same case.

772

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Must be offered in evidence in
order to be considered
by the court.

Need not be offered in
evidence since they already
form part of the records.

May be given in evidence
against the admitter.

Not only is it evidence
against the admitter but is is
binding upon him.

May be contradicted
by the admitter.

May not be contradicted by
the admitter except by
showing that the admission
was made through palpable
mistake or that the imputed
admission was not, in fact,
made. (S4 R129)

Q.

Distinguish a
party
admission
declaration against interest.

from

a

A.
PARTY ADMISSION

DECLARATION AGAINST
INTEREST

Made by a party.

Made by a non-party, i.e., the
declarant.

Need not be against the
admitter's interest.

Must be against the
declarant's interest.

Not hearsay and thus
admissible.

Hearsay but admissible as an
exception to the hearsay rule.

No requirement that the
admitter is dead or
unable to testify.

The declarant must be dead
or unable to testify.

Admissible only against
the admitter.

Admissible against the
declarant and third persons.

773

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What are the forms which an admission may take?

A.

An admission may be in the form of an act, a
declaration or statement, or an omission (A80).

Q.

Give examples of acts as admissions.

A.
1) Voluntary participation in the police re-enactment
of a crime.
2) Flight from the scene of a crime.
3) Changing one's appearance or name.
4) Transfer of property.
Q.

May an offer of compromise be considered as
an admission of liability by the offeror?

A.

It depends. In civil cases, an offer of compromise is
not an admission of liability and is not admissible in
evidence against the offerer. Neither is evidence of
conduct nor statements made in compromise
negotiations admissible, except evidence otherwise
discoverable or offered for another purpose, such
as proving bias or prejudice of a witness, negativing
a contention of undue delay, or proving an effort to
obstruct a criminal investigation or prosecution.
(828 R130, 2020 Rules on Evidence).
However in criminal cases, an offer of
compromise by the accused may be received in
evidence as an implied admission of guilt.
Excepted from this rule are offers of compromise in
criminal cases involving quasi-offenses or those
allowed by law to be compromised. (827 R130).

774

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

D's truck smashed into P's car and destroyed it.
P sued D for damages. D offered to compromise
by paying P450,000to P. May P introduce the
offer to provethe value of the car?

A.

Yes. While the offer is not admissible to prove D's
admission of liability, it may be offered to prove
something else, such as the fair estimate of the
value of the property subject of the settlement
proposal. ( Varadero de Manila v. Insular Lumber,
46 Phil. 176).

Q.

Is the accused's offer to marry the rape victim
an implied admission of guilt?

A.

Yes. (People v. Bulos, G. R. No. 123542, 26 June 2001 ).

Q.

The accused was the suspect in the murder of
his wife. Upon meeting his sister-in-law, the
accused pleaded for her forgiveness. May this
be receivedin evidenceas an implied admission
of guilt?

A.

Yes. The accused's act of pleading for his sister-inlaw's forgiveness may be considered as analogous
to an attempt to compromise, which can be
received in evidence as an implied admission of
guilt under 828 R130. (People v. Espanol, 13
February 2009).

Q.

The wife of the accused offered P25,000to the
rape victim's mother to dissuade her from filing
a case. At the time the offer was' made, no
criminal complaint had yet been filed against
the accused, although the accused's wife was
already aware of the rape incident. May this
offer be received in evidence against the
accused as an implied admission of guilt?
775

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes, since it is an attempt to compromise. An offer
to compromise does not require that a criminal
complaint be first filed before the offer can be
received in evidence against the offerer. What is
required is that after committing the crime, the
accused or his representative makes an offer to
compromise and such offer is proved. (People v.
Yparraguirre, 268 SCRA 35, 41 [1997]). It may be
argued that the offer of compromise should not be
so received since it it res inter alias acta. See
People v. Erguiza, infra.

Q.

X's parents heard that X had been accused by
the parents of AAA of raping their 13-year-old
daughter. X's parents went to the house of AAA
and offered to her parents PS00,000 for the
settlement of the case but nothing came out of
it. X was later prosecuted for raping AAA. X
testified that he did not ask his parents to settle
the case. May the prosecutionoffer in evidence
the settlement offer as evidence of X's guilt?

A.

No. The offer made by X's parents is res inter alias
acta and does not bind X.
The Supreme Court has held that an offer of
compromise from an unauthorized person cannot
amount to an admission of the party himself. Although
it was held in some cases that an attempt of the
parents of the accused to settle the case is an implied
admission of guilt, the better rule is that for a
compromise to amount to an implied admission of
guilt, the accused should have been present or at
least authorized the proposed compromise. (People
v. Erguiza, 571 SCRA 634, 650 [2008]).

776

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Pedro was charged with homicide for having
hacked Ramon to death. Before the case could
be tried, the heirs of Ramon sought out Pedro
and discussed with him the possibility of
settling the case. Pedro agreed to a settlement.
When the heirs asked how much he was willing
to pay, Pedro offered P30,000which the heirs
accepted. Is the agreement to settle as well as
the offer to pay P30,000by Pedro admissible in
evidence against him as an implied admission
of guilt? Explain. (89 Bar Q11 ).

A.

Yes. Under S28 R130 an offer of compromise by
the accused may be received in evidence as an
implied admission of guilt. It does not matter who
initiated the compromise talks just so long as the
accused made an offer.

Q.

X, charged with rape with homicide, offered
P100,000as amicable settlement to the family of
the victim. The family refused. During the trial,
the prosecution presented in evidence X's offer
of compromise. What is the legal implication of
such offer? Explain. (96 Bar Q15-3).

A.

The legal implication of such offer is that it may be
received in evidence as an implied admission by X
of his guilt. Under S28 R130 an offer of compromise
by the accused may be received in evidence as an
implied admission of guilt.

Q.

Ms. Kalalo is a dealer of San Miguel Beer. She
issued checks to SMCfor the paymentof beer but
the checks were dishonored.SMCsent a demand
letter to Kalalo for the value of the dishonored
checks. In the face of constant threats by SMC
agents, Kalalo sent a letter to SMC through

777

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

counsel in which she stated that she could not
pay due to collection difficulties and in which she
proposed a compromise settlement by paying the
outstanding balance in installments. SMB rejected
the compromise offer and later filed a B.P. Big. 22
case against Kalalo. May Kalalo's offer of
compromise be received in evidence as an
implied admission of her guilt?

A.

No. The offer of compromise was made prior to the
filing of the criminal complaint against her for a
violation of the Bouncing Checks Law. The offer of
compromise was clearly not made in the context of
a criminal proceeding and hence cannot be
considered as an implied admission of guilt. ( San
Miguel Corp. v. Kala/a, 672 SCRA 401, 408 [2012],
Sereno, J.).123

Q.

A fight broke out between B and C, as a result
of which C was hospitalized. B offered to pay
for C's medical and hospitalization expenses
which C declined. May such offer to pay be
admitted in evidence against B as proof of
criminal liability for the injury?

A.

No. An offer to pay or the payment of medical,
hospital or other expenses occasioned by an injury
is not admissible in evidence as proof of civil or
criminal liability for the injury. (S27 R130). This
provision is also known as the "good Samaritan"
rule. (CHRISTOPHER
MUELLER & LAIRD
KIRKPATRICK, EVIDENCE: PRACTICE UNDER
THE RULES 352 [2nd ed.]). The evidence is barred

123Compare
with People v. Yparraguirre, 268 SCRA 35, 41 (1997), a
prosecution for rape, wherein it was stated that "[a]n offer to compromise does
not require that a criminal complaint be first filed before the offer can be received
in evidence against the offerer." The Kalalo holding may be justified on the
reasoning that the offer was evidently in relation to the civil aspect of the case.

778

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

on grounds of social policy. By barring adverse
evidentiary use, the rule encourages citizens to act
on their humane impulses. (Id.).
Q.

Is a withdrawn or unaccepted guilty plea
admissible in evidence against the accused?

A.

No. A plea of guilty later withdrawn or an
unaccepted offer of a guilty plea to a lesser offense,
as in plea bargaining, is not admissible in evidence
against the accused who made the plea or offer.
Neither is any statement made in the course of plea
bargaining with the prosecution, which does not
result in a plea of guilty or which results in a plea of
guilty later withdrawn. admissible. (S28 R130).124

Q.

Panchito sued Dolphy for damages for injuries
that Panchito incurred when a badly rotted limb
fell from a curbside tree in front of Dolphy's
home and hit Panchito. At trial, Panchito offered
testimony that, a week after the accident,
Dolphy had cut the tree down with a chainsaw.
Is the testimony admissible to show an implied
admission of negligence on the part of Dolphy?

A.

No. Evidence of post-accident repairs or subsequent
remedial measures are inadmissible to prove
negligence or wrong-doing since there is a public
policy concern of encouraging safety precautions or
remedial measures. (FRE 407).

Q.

What is the rule on admission by silence?

A.

Any act or declaration made in the presence and
within the hearing or observation of a party who
does or says nothing: (NP)
12

4The underscored portion was added by the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

779

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(1)

when the act or declaration is such as
naturally to call for action or comment (ncac) if
not true, and

(2)

when proper and possible (propo) for him to do
so, may be given in evidence against such party.

Q.

Give an example of admission by silence.

A.

Accused's silence when his wife's nephew asked
him why he killed his wife is an admission by
silence under 833 R 130. (People v. Espanol, 13
February 2009).

Q.

Prosecution of X for carnapping. Police investigator
testifies that a bystander said in the accused's
presence and hearing that the accused was the
culprit to which the accused did not make any
reply. The defense objects on the ground that
the bystander's statement is hearsay. Is the
objection meritorious?

A.

No. An act or declaration made in the presence and
within the hearing or observation of a party who
does or says nothing when the act or declaration is
such as naturally to call for action or comment if not
true, and when proper and possible for him to do
so, may be given in evidence against him. (833
R130). Here the bystander's declaration was offered
to show that the accused did not reply thereto and
thus to show an admission by silence. Admission
by silence is not covered by the hearsay rule.
(RICHARD LEMPERT & STEPHEN SAL TZBURG,
A MODERN APPROACH TO EVIDENCE 365-66
[1982, 3rd reprint 1988]).

780

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Is the failure to respond to a demand letter an
implied admission of liability?

A.

No. Failure to respond to a demand letter is not an
implied admission of liability. A person does not
make a letter evidence by sending it to a party
against whom he wishes to prove the facts stated
therein. He can no more impose a duty to answer
a charge than he can impose a duty to pay by
sending goods. (Phil. First Ins. Co. v. Wal/em Phils.,
G.R. No. 165647, 26 March 2009, Tinga, J.).

Q.

Pogi was brought to the police station for
investigation on the alleged rape of Ganda. While
in the police station, Ganda pointed to Pogi and
said, "He's the one who raped me." Pogi
remained silent. May Pogi's silence be offered in
evidence as an implied admissionof guilt?

A.

No. The rule on admission by silence does not
apply since Pogi had a right to remain silent while
under custodial investigation.

Q.

What is the doctrine of adoptive admission?

A.

Adoptive admission is where a party, by his words or
conduct, voluntarily adopts or ratifies another's
statement. Evidence of the statement would then be
admissible against the party. (Republic v. Kenrick
Dev't Corp., G.R. No. 149576, 8 August 2006).

Q.

What is the res inter alias acta rule?

A.

Res inter alias acta literally means "things done
among others." Under the law on evidence it means
the act, declaration, or omission of a third party.
The rule on res inter alias acta is found in S29
R130 which provides that the rights of a party
cannot be prejudiced by an act, declaration, or
781

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

orrussron of another. (Taer v. People, G.R. No.
85204, 18 June 1990). The rule's meaning has also
been extended to cover the similar acts rule in 834
R130, although such usage is not altogether
precise since the similar acts rule involves the acts
of a party himself, not of others.

Q.

X and Y were charged with murder. Upon
application of the prosecution,Y was discharged
from the Information to be utilized as a state
witness. The prosecutor presentedY as witness
but forgot to state the purpose of his testimony
much less offer it in evidence.Y testified that he
and X conspired to kill the victim but it was X who
actually shot the victim. The testimony of Y was
the only material evidence establishing the guilt
of X. Y was thoroughly cross-examinedby the
defense counsel. After the prosecution rested its
case, the defense filed a demurrer to evidence
basedon the following grounds:
(a) xxx
(b) Y's testimony is not admissible against X
pursuant to the rule on res inter alias acta.
Rule on the demurrer to evidence on the
above grounds. (03 Bar Q20ed).

A.

Demurrer to evidence denied.
(a) xxx
(b) The ground that Y's testimony is not admissible
against X pursuant to the rule on res inter alias
acta is untenable. The res inter alias acta
rule under 829 R130 applies only to
acts, declarations, and omissions which are
extra-judicial.

782

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Here Y's testimony was made in court and
he could be cross-examined as in fact he was
cross-examined by X. Hence Y's testimony is
admissible against X.
Q.

May the importer-consignee be held criminally
liable for false import declarations prepared and
signed by his customs broker?

A.

No, in the absence of proof of conspiracy between
the importer-consignee and his customs broker.
To allow to allow the act or omission of the customs
broker to bind the importer-consignee would be
unacceptable under the principle of res inter alias
acta embodied in S29 R130. (Mercado v. People, 8
July 2015, Bersamin, J.)

Q.

What is or are the exceptions to the res inter
alias acta rule?

A.

The exceptions
are the so-called vicarious
admissions under Sections 30 to 32 of Rule 130.
These are the admissions by: (J CAPP)
1) Co-partner. (S30 R 130).
2) Agent. (Id.)
3) Joint owner, joint debtor, or other person jointly
interested with the party. (Id.).
4) Co-conspirator. (S31 R130).
5) Privies.

(S32 R 130).

Q.

Discuss the rule on admission by co-partner or
agent. (SEE)

A.

The act or declaration of a partner or agent
authorized by the party to make a statement

783

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

concerning the subject or within the scope of his
authority and during the existence of the
partnership or agency, may be given in evidence
against such party after the partnership or agency
is shown by evidence other than such act or
declaration. (830 R130).
Q.

Does 530 R130 also refer to statements of an
employee within the scope of his employment?

A.

It is submitted that it does. Although 830 R130 uses
the word "agent" and not "employee," the history and
rationale of the evidentiary rule in the United States
from where the provision was taken also considers
statements by employees within the scope of their
employment as vicarious admissions.125

Q.

Plaintiff, a guest in defendant's theater, slipped
and fell by reason of wet spots on the floor.
Plaintiff proposes to testify that after she fell,
she noticed a janitor mopping the floor and she
heard an usher say to the janitor, "Now you
come when it's too late, after someone falls.
Why didn't you come a half hour ago when I
called you?" Would such testimony be admissible
over an objection that it is res inter a/ios acta
and hearsay?126

A.

Yes. The statement was made by the usher within
the scope of her authority or employment and thus
binding upon her employer as a vicarious
admission. What the rule requires is that the
Jerome

125

L. Gull, Vicarious Admissions and Utterances, 47 Marquette
Law Review 84 (1963). See also FRE 801(d)(2)(D) which considers as nonhearsay statements by an agent or employee on a matter within the scope of the
relationship and while it existed.
126This
hypothetical is taken from ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, REMEDIAL
LAW QUIZZER 203 (2004 ed.).

784

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

statement concerns a matter within the scope of the
agency or employment relationship. The rule does
not require that the declarant "have authority to
bind its employer," because few employers will
authorize employees to make binding admissions in
litigation.127 Since the statement is a vicarious
admission, it is also excluded from the hearsay rule.
This holding also finds support in 830 R130 which
mentions "partner or agent authorized by the party
to make the statement concerning the subject or
within the scope of his or her authority."

Prof. Bautista's suggested answer is that the
objection should be sustained since the usher,
while an employee of the defendant, does not have
"speaking authority" to make such statements in
order to bind his defendant employee. However the
"authorized admission doctrine" has been largely
abandoned by the United States courts since it is
unrealisticto expect that employers would authorize
employees to speak on matters which may
incriminate the employer.128
Q.

Plaintiff sues defendant store for a broken hip
she suffered after she slipped and fell at the
store. Plaintiff offers her testimony to the effect
that after her fall she overheard one of the
grocery checkers say that the floor had too
much wax on it. Defendant's lawyer objected to
the offer on the ground that the testimony
relates to res inter alios acta and to hearsay.
Should the objection be sustained?
127Big

Apple BMW Inc. v. BMW of North America. Inc., 974 F.2d 1358,
1372 (3d Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 113 S.Ct. 1262 (1993); see also Advisory
Committee Note to Rule 801(d)(2)(D); Woodman v. Haemonetics Corp., 51 F.3d
1087, 1094 (1st Cir. 1995) (same).
1281d.

785

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes. An employee's declaration about matters not
falling within his own scope of authority should not be
admissible against his employer. The grocery
checker's authority did not in any manner extend to
the condition of the floor. Since the grocery checker's
out-of-court statement is not a vicarious admission, it
is also inadmissible for being hearsay. (Mann v,
Safeway Stores, Inc, 518 P.2d 1194 [1974]).

Q.

Discuss the rule on admission by joint owner,
joint debtor, or other person jointly interested
with the party.

A.

The act or declaration of a joint owner, joint debtor,
or other person jointly interested with the party
within the scope of his authority and during the
existence of the joint ownership, debt, or interest
may be given in evidence against such party after
the joint ownership, debt, or interest is shown by
evidence other than such act or declaration. (SEE)

Q.

D and E are jointly indebted to P in the amount
of P600,000. E told P that the debt is not yet
paid. May P introduce this declaration in a suit
by P against D?

A.

No. E's statement is res inter alias acta. While S30
R130 speaks of "joint debtor" and "jointly interested,"
the term "joint" is used in the sense of "joint and
several" under American common law or "solidary"
in the Spanish continental law. (Jaucian v. Querol,
38 Phil. 707, 718). So S30 should be read to refer
to "co-owner," "solidary debtor," and "person
solidarily interested." Since E is a joint debtor rather
than a solidary debtor, his act or declaration is not
binding upon D.

786

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Sometime in 1984, subdivision developer Ayala
Land, Inc. (ALI) sold a parcel of land to the
spouses Yuson. In 1987,the spouses Yuson sold
the land to the spouses Felipe and Mary Anne
Alfonso. A Deedof Restrictionswas annotatedin
TCT No. 149166issued to the spouses Alfonso,
as had been required by ALI. The Deed of
Restrictions indicated that the property shall be
used exclusively for the establishment and
maintenance thereon of a preparatory (nursery
and kindergarten)school. The Deedof Restrictions
provides that the same may be enforced by ALI
and/or the homeowners'association.
ALI turned over the right and power to
enforce the restrictions on the properties in the
Ayala Alabang Village, including the above
restrictions on TCT No. 149166, to the
association of homeowners therein, the Ayala
Alabang Village Association (AAVA).
In 1989, the spouses Alfonso opened on
the same lot The Learning Child Center Preschool (TLC), a preparatory school which
initially consisted of nursery and kindergarten
classes. In 1991,TLC was expanded to include
a grade school program, the School of the Holy
Cross, which provided additional grade levels
as the pupils who initially enrolled advanced.
On October 13, 1992, AAVA filed with the
Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Makati City an
action for injunction against TLC and the
spouses Alfonso, alleging breach of contract by
the defendant spouses, particularly of the Deed
of Restrictions, the contents of which likewise
appear in the Deedof Absolute Sale.

787

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

During the trial, TLC introduced in evidence
statements of ALI that it had agreed to the
reclassification of the subject property as
"institutional" and that the school was a
"worthy undertaking." AAVA argued that it is
not bound by these statements of ALI under the
res inter alios acta rule in 528 R130. Is AAVA's
argument tenable?
A.

No. Acts and declarations of the developer ALI
would be binding upon AAVA in an action to
enforce the deed of restrictions on subdivision lots
in Ayala Alabang Village. This is because the deed
of restrictions provide that the same may be
enforced by ALI and/or AA VA. Hence ALI is a
person jointly interested with AAVA within the
purview of S29 R130. (The Learning Child Inc. v.
Ayala Alabang Village Association, 7 July 2010,
Leonardo-De Castro, J. ).
Note: Nonetheless the SC held that the
statements were not "damaging" to AAVA and ruled
in its favor. The ruling in TLCI v. AAVA seems to
imply that since the statements were not
"damaging" to AAVA, the latter was not bound by
them. This is not altogether correct since a party
admission need not be against interest. The more
proper basis is that an extrajudicial admission is not
automatically binding upon an admitter since it may
be contradicted or explained by the admitter.

Q.

MBMI a Canadian corporation, entered into a joint
venture with corporations A, B, and C. Redmont
Corporation filed a petition to cancel the mining
licenses of A, B, and C corporations on the
ground that the foreign equity exceeded 40%.
The Court of Appeals in finding on appeal that

788

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

MBMI owned more than 60% of the capital stock
of corporationsA, B, and C, took into account the
statements of MBMI to that effect. Corporations
A, B, and C argued that MBMl's statements are
res inter alios acta since MBMI is not a party to
the case.Is this argumentcorrect?
A.

No. The CA correctly applied 830 R 130 on joint
interest. By entering into a joint venture, MBMI has
a joint interest with Corporations A, B, and C.
Hence its statements in relation to such joint
venture are an exception to the res inter alias acta
rule. (Narra Nickel Mining Corp. v. Redmont
ConsolidatedMines Corp., 21 April 2014).

Q.

State the rule on admission by privies.

A.

Where one derives title to property from another,
the latter's act, declaration, or omission, in relation
to the property, is evidence against the former
if done while the latter was holding the title.
(832 R130).

Q.

A sold an alleged Amorsolo painting to B. B
then sold the painting to C. C sues B alleging
that the painting is not a genuine Amorsolo.
During the trial, may C present witness W who
will testify that he heard A say while he was the
owner that the painting was not a genuine
Amorsolo over objection that A's statement
does not bind B and that the same is hearsay?

A.

Yes C may present witness W to testify on what he
heard A say.
The statement binds B since it was made by a
privy of B. Where one derives title to property from
another, the act, declaration, or omission of the latter,

789

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

while holding the title, in relation to the property, is
evidence against the former. (832 R130).
The statement being a party admission is not
hearsay and hence admissible. (FRE 801(d)(2);
Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. Nos. 146710-15, 3
April 2001 ).129
Q.

State the rule on admission by a co-conspirator.

A

The act or declaration of a conspirator in furtherance
of the conspiracy and during its ~xistence, may be
given in evidence against the co-conspirator after
the conspiracy is shown by ~vidence other than
such act or declaration. (831 R130 of the 2020
Rules on Evidence). (FEE). The amendment under
the new rules consists of replacing "relating to" with
"in furtherance of."

Q.

What is the meaning of "in furtherance of" in
531 R130?

A

To prove that a statement has been made in
furtherance of a conspiracy it need be shown only that
the statement was intended to advance the objectives
of the conspiracy. The federal courts in the U.S. have
read the requirement liberally, interpreting it
to encompass such evidence as declarations of
future intent and statements unwittingly made to
law enforcement officials. For example, narrative
statements relating past events are not considered to
have been made in furtherance of a conspiracy.
Additionally, confessions made to law enforcement
officials, and statements which are conversational or
mere bragging do not satisfy the requirement. (Daniel
R. Rizzolo, Testing the Reliability of Coconspirators'

129A's
statement would be res inter a/ios acta if made by him after he had
sold the painting to B.

790

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Statements Admitted under Federal Rule of Evidence
801 [d][2][E]: Putting the Claws Back in the
Confrontation Clause, 30 Viii. L. Rev. 1565 [1985]).
Q.

D and E conspiredto rob the houseof X. After the
robbery, E bragged to W that he and D had
conspired to rob X's house and and had gotten
PS,000,000. D was tried for robbery. S testified
that D and E conspired to rob X. The prosecution
then offered the testimony of W to prove what E
had bragged to him. May the testimony be
admitted in evidence over objection that it is res
inter alias acta?

A.

No. The statement of E is res inter alias acta and
does not bind D. The statement does not qualify as
a vicarious admission since it was made at a time
when the conspiracy
had already
ended.
Additionally, the statement was not in furtherance
of the conspiracy since it was merely a brag to a
person not involved with the conspiracy.

Q.

A group of 3 persons, Andy, Buboy, and Cito,
robbed a house in a barrio. When they were
fleeing after the robbery, they were intercepted
by the police. Shots were fired, and Andy was
mortally wounded. Before he passed away, but
conscious of his impending death, Andy
admitted his participation in the robbery, and
named Buboy and Cito as his companions and
co-conspirators. During the trial of Buboy and
Cito for robbery, the prosecution presented as
its first witness Dodong who testified that Andy,
Buboy, and Cito had plannedto rob the house.
a) Was the statement of Andy admissible as a
dying declaration? Explain.
791

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) Was Andy's statement admissible against
Buboy and Cito as the statement of a coconspirator? Explain.
c) May Andy's statement be presented against
Buboy and Cito on the ground that it is an
exception to the hearsay rule being a
declaration against interest?
A.
a) No, the statement of Andy was not admissible
as a dying declaration.
Under the Rules on Evidence, a dying
declaration must relate to the circumstances
surrounding his death. [837 R130]
Here the declaration did not relate to the
circumstances surrounding Andy's death but to his
and Buboy's and Cito's participation in the robbery.
Hence the statement was not admissible as a
dying declaration.
b) No, the statement of Andy was not admissible
against Buboy and Cito as the statement of a
co-conspirator.
Under the Rules on Evidence, an extrajudicial
statement of a co-conspirator in order to be binding
upon the other co-conspirators must have been
made during the existence of the conspiracy.
[830 R130]
Here the conspiracy was no longer existing
when Andy made the statement. Hence the same is
not binding upon Buboy and Cito.

792

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

c) No, since the portion implicating Buboy and Cito
is not contrary to Andy's interest.
Q.

D and E conspired to rob the house of X. After
the robbery, E was arrested. During the trial of
D for robbery, may the prosecution present over
objection the testimony of E that he and D
conspired to rob X's house?

A.

Yes. The rule on res inter alias acta does not apply
to in-court testimony. The reason is that the
opponent would have the opportunity to crossexamine the witness.

Q.

In an extrajudicial confession before the
Philippine National Police and NBI officers, A,
charged with murder, voluntarily admitted the
charges, but incriminated B and C as his coconspirators.Apprehended,B and C vehemently
denied the charge or any participation therein.
Disregarding however B and C's counsel's
objection to the admissibility of A's confession
as against B and C, the prosecution filed the
corresponding information against the two.
At the trial before the Regional Trial Court,
counsel for B and C again vigorously objected
to A's testimony. Is A's testimony on the
witness stand incriminating B and C admissible
against them? Reasons.(59 Bar).130

A.

Yes. The rule on res inter alias acta does not apply
to in-court testimony. The reason is that the
opponent would have the opportunity to crossexamine the witness.

130Question
sourced from 4 ABELARDO T. DOMONDON, 100 YEARS OF
THE BAR AND BEYOND IN REMEDIAL LAW 411-412 (2015 1st ed.).

793

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is a confession? How is it distinguished
from an admission?

A.

A confession is a declaration of an accused
acknowledging his guilt of the offense charged, or
of any offense necessarily included therein. An
accused's confession may be given in evidence
against him. (S34 R130). The confession referred
to in S34 R130 is an extrajudicial confession. This
should be distinguished from a guilty plea which is
covered by S3 & 4 R116.

Q.

May an extrajudicial confession be given in
evidence against a person other than the
confessant?

A.

No on the ground that a person may not be bound
by the act or declaration of another. It cannot be
admitted against his or her co-accused and is
considered as hearsay against them. (Sa/apuddin
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 184681, 25 February
2013). The exception would be when the confession
is used as corroborative or circumstantial evidence
as in the case of interlocking confessions.

Q.

The accused made a confession to a Bantay
Bayan, a member of a barangay-based volunteer
organization in the nature of watch groups.
While making his confession the accused was
not assisted by counsel. Is his confession
admissible in evidence against him?

A.

No. Barangay-based volunteer organizations in the
nature of watch groups, as in the case of the
"bantay bayan," are recognized by the local
government unit to perform functions relating to the
preservation of peace and order at the barangay
level. Thus, any inquiry he makes has the color of
794

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

a state-related function and objective insofar as the
entitlement of a suspect to his constitutional rights
provided for under Article 111, Section 12 of the
Constitution, otherwise known as the Miranda
Rights, is concerned. (People v. Lauga, 15 March
2010, Perez, J.).131
Q.

What are interlockingconfessions? (ICIC)

A.

Interlocking confessions are extrajudicial confessions
independently made without collusion which are
identical with each other in their essential details
and are corroborated by other evidence on record
are admissible as circumstantial evidence against
the person implicated to show the probability of the
latter's actual participation in the commission of the
crime. (People v. Molleda, 86 SCRA 667).

Q.

May an extrajudicial confession made by an
accused be sufficient ground for conviction?

A.

No, unless it is corroborated by evidence of corpus
delicti. (S3 R133).
Rights of a person under custodial investigation

Q.

What are the rights of a person under custodial
investigation?

A.

A person under investigation for the commission of
an offense (custodial investigation) shall have the
following rights: (SC VS)
(1) Right to remain silent and right to be informed
of such right.

1310n
the other hand, an accused's admissions before a barangay tanod
and barangay officials made in public, with other persons present, were held
admissible notwithstanding that the accused was not afforded his Miranda rights.
(People v. Sace, 5 April 2010).

795

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(2) Right to have competent and independent
counsel preferably of his own choice and to be
informed of such right. If the person cannot
afford the services of counsel, he must be
provided with one. The right to remain silent and
to counsel cannot be waived except in writing
and in the presence of counsel.
(3) The right against torture, force, violence, threat,
intimidation, or any other means which vitiate
the free will.
(4) The right against secret detention places,
solitary, incommunicado, or other similar forms
of detention (siso). (Sec. 12, Art. Ill, Constitution).
Q.

What is the consequence if the confession or
admission was obtained in violation of the
foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation?

A.

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of
the foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation shall be inadmissible in evidence
against him. (Sec. 12[3], Art. 111, Constitution).

Q.

During custodial investigation at the Western
Police District, Mario Margal was informed of
his constitutional right to remain silent and to
have competent and independent counsel. He
decided to waive his right to counsel and
proceeded to make a statement admitting
commissionof a robbery.In the same statement,
he implicatedAntonio Carreon,his co-conspirator
in the crime.
a) Is Margal's statementadmissible in evidence
against him?
796

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

b) Is it admissible against Carreon as an exception
to the res inter alios acta rule? (91 Bar Q13).
A.
a) Margal's statement is not admissible against him.
Under the Constitution, the right of a person
under investigation for the commission of an
offense to remain silent and to counsel cannot be
waived except in writing and in the presence of
counsel. Any confession obtained in violation of this
provision shall be inadmissible in evidence against
him. (Article Ill, Section 12, Constitution).
Here there is no showing that the waiver
is in writing and was made in the presence of
counsel. Hence Margal's statement is inadmissible
against him.
b) No, Margal's statement is not admissible against
Carreon as an exception to the res inter alios
acta rule.
Under 831 R130, in order that the statement of
a conspirator may be given in evidence against a
co-conspirator, such statement must have been
made during the existence of the conspiracy.
Here the conspiracy had ended when Margal's
statement was made. Hence the same is inadmissible
against Carreon.
Q.

The barangay captain reported to the police that
X was illegally keeping in his house in the
barangay an Armalite M16 rifle. On the strength
of that information, the police conducted a
search of the house of X and indeed found said
rifle. The police raiders seized the rifle and

797

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

brought X to the police station. During the
investigation, he voluntarilysigned a Sworn
Statement that he was possessing said rifle
without license or authority to possess, and a
Waiver of Right to Counsel. Individuallyrule on
the admissibility
in evidence of the:
a) Rifle;
b) Sworn Statement;and
c) Waiver of Right to Counsel of X. (98 Bar Q17)
A.
a) The rifle is inadmissible in evidence. Under the
Constitution, evidence seized without a valid
search warrant is inadmissible in evidence.
Here the rifle was seized without the police
raiders being armed by any search warrant.
b) The sworn statement is inadmissible in evidence.
Under the Constitution, a person under
custodial investigation has the right to be
informed of his right to remain silent and his
right to competent and independent counsel.
Here X was not so informed; hence the
statement is inadmissible in evidence against
him pursuant to Section 12(3), Art. Ill of
the Constitution.
c) The Waiver of Right to Counsel of X is
inadmissible in evidence against him. Under the
constitution, the waiver of the right to counsel
must be made in the presence of counsel. Here
the waiver was not made in the presence of
counsel; hence the same is inadmissible in
evidence against him pursuant to Section 12(3),
Art. 111 of the Constitution.
798

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Arrested in a buy-bust operation, Edmond was
brought to the police station where he was
informed of his constitutional rights. During the
investigation, Edmond refused to give any
statement. However,the arresting officer asked
Edmond to acknowledge in writing that six (6)
sachets of "shabu" were confiscated from him.
Edmond consented and also signed a receipt
for the amount of P3,000.00, allegedly
representingthe "purchase price of the shabu."
At the trial, the arresting officer testified and
identified the documents executed and signed
by Edmond. Edmond's lawyer did not object to
the testimony. After the presentation of the
testimonial evidence, the prosecutor made a
formal offer of evidence which included the
documentssigned by Edmond.
Edmond'slawyerobjectedto the admissibility
of the documents for being the "fruit of the
poisoned tree." Resolve the objection with
reasons.(09 Bar Q6).

A.

Objection sustained.
The Supreme Court has held that the signature
of an accused in a receipt of items seized which
signature was obtained without the assistance of
counsel is inadmissible in evidence the same being
tantamount to an uncounselled extra-judicial
confession. (Gutang v. People, 11 July 2000).
The objection to the documentary evidence
was made timely at the time these were offered in
evidence. It was premature to object to the
documents when they were merely being marked
and identified.
799

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Similar Acts Rule
Q.

What is the similar acts rule?

A.

The similar acts rule provides that evidence that
one did or did not do a certain thing at one time is
not admissible to prove that he did or did not do the
same or similar thing at another time; but it may be
received to prove a plan, intent, knowledge,
identity, custom, habit, usage, system, and the like
(PIKICHUS) (S35 R130).

Q.

The prosecution charges that on June 15,
Andoy possessed an ounce of shabu with intent
to sell. Andoy admits the possession of the
shabu but insists that the same was for his
personal use. May the prosecution introduce
evidence that Andoy had sold shabu on May 1,
May 15, and June 1 over an objection that such
would violate the similar acts rule?

A.

Yes since the evidence of the prior acts of selling
would tend to show Andoy's intent to sell the drugs
he possessed on June 15.

Q.

The Defendants argued that Xavierville Estate
Inc. (XEI) had allowed them to pay the balance
of the purchase price of a subdivision lot in 120
monthly installments.The Defendantsintroduced
three contracts to sell in which XEI granted two
lot buyers a 120-month term of payment and a
third one a 180-month term. May these three
contracts to sell prove a habit or custom on the
part of XEI to grant 120-month terms of
paymentsto its buyers?

A.

No. Under S35 R 130, evidence that one did or did
not do a certain thing at one time is not admissible

800

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

to prove that he did or did not do the same or a
similar thing at another time; but it may be received
to prove usage, habit or custom.
Courts must contend with the caveat that
before they admit evidence of usage, habit, or
pattern of conduct, the offering party must establish
the degree of specificity and frequency of uniform
response that ensures more than a mere tendency
to act in a given manner but rather conduct that is
semi-automatic in nature. In determining whether
the examples are numerous enough and sufficiently
regular, the key criteria are adequacy of sampling
and uniformity of response.
Here the Defendants did not introduce any
evidence that XEI and all the lot buyers in the
subdivision had executed contracts of sale
containing uniform terms and conditions. Moreover
even in the 3 contracts adduced by the Defendants
there was no uniformity as two referred to 120month terms while the third mentioned a 180-month
term. (Boston Bank v. Manalo, G.R. No. 158149, 9
February 2006).
Q.

Alejo was stabbed in the abdomen. He
immediately called for help and a policeman
promptly approached him. He told the policeman
that he felt he would die from the serious
wound inflicted on him by Danilo who has a
grudge against him.
He was brought to a
hospital for treatment where, on the same day,
he was shot and killed by someone whose
identity could not be established by an eyewitness. Eventually, Danilo was charged in court
for the death of Alejo. The prosecution had to
build its case on circumstantial evidence. At the
801

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

ensuing trial, the policeman was presented to
testify on the declaration made to him by Alejo.
The defense objected. Meeting the objection,
the prosecution argued for the admissibility of
the evidence as a dying declaration (ante
mortem statement)or as part of the res gestae,
either of which, when deemed competent
evidence as an exception to the hearsay rule,
would demonstrably be relevant to the ultimate
fact in issue, the guilt of Danilo for the death of
Alejo. The defense countered by arguing that
no facts relevantto the stabbing can be relevant
to the shooting.
Is the contention of the prosecution with
respect to the relevancy and competency of
evidencecorrect? Discuss fully. (92 Bar Q2).
A.

The argument of the prosecution with respect to
the relevancy and competency of the evidence is
not correct.
The statement of Alejo is not admissible as a
dying declaration because it did not relate to the
cause and circumstances surrounding his fatal
shooting.
The statement would have been admissible as
part of the res gestae since it was made
immediately after a startling occurrence, i.e., his
stabbing. However it should not be received in
evidence for it would violate the similar acts rule.
(S35 R130). Evidence that Danilo stabbed Alejo is
not admissible to prove that Danilo was the one
who shot Alejo. The defense argument that no facts
relating to the stabbing can be relevant to the

802

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

shooting was in substance an objection based on
the similar acts rule.
Q.

Give the sexual abuse shield rule in criminal
cases involving child abuse.

A.

Under the sexual abuse shield rule in criminal
cases involving child abuse, the following are not
admissible:
( 1) Evidence offered to prove that the alleged
victim engaged in other sexual behavior.
(2) Evidence
offered to prove the sexual
predisposition of the alleged victim. (S30 Rule
on Examination of a Child Witness).

Q.

What is the exception to the sexual abuse
shield rule?

A.

Evidence of specific instances of sexual behavior by
the alleged victim to prove that a person other than
the accused was the source of the semen, injury, or
other physical evidence (siope) shall be admissible.
A party intending to offer such evidence must
file a pretrial motion at least 15 days before the trial
stating that he intends to offer such evidence in
order to prevent unfair surprise upon the other
party. (S30 RECW).

Q.

Give the rape shield rule in rape cases.

A.

In prosecutions for rape, evidence of complainant's
past sexual conduct, opinion thereof or of his/her
reputation (PaSCOR) shall not be admitted unless,
and only to the extent that the court finds, that such
evidence is material and relevant to the case. (Sec.

803

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

6, RA. No. 8505
Assistance Act]).

[Rape Victim

Protection &

Q.

Prosecution for rape where accused raises the
defense of consent. May accused introduce
evidence that complainant had extramarital sex
with other men over the relevant objection?

A.

No. Under the Rape Shield Rule, evidence of a rape
complainant's past sexual conduct is inadmissible
unless found by the court to be material and
relevant to the case. Here the evidence of sexual
acts with men other than the accused is irrelevant.
Even an immoral woman has some freedom of
selection. (See U.S. v. Kasto (584 F.2d 268 [1978])
HEARSAY RULE AND ITS EXCEPTIONS

Q.

Define hearsay.

A.

Hearsay is a statement other than one made by the
declarant while testifying at a trial or hearing,
offered to prove the truth of the facts asserted
therein. A statement is (1) an oral or written
assertion or (2) a non-verbal conduct of a person, if
it is intended by him as an assertion.
A statement is not hearsay if the declarant
testifies at the trial or hearing and is subject to
cross-examination concerning the statement, and
the statement is (a) inconsistent with the declarant's
testimony and was given under oath subject to the
penalty of perjury at a trial, hearing, or other
proceeding, or in a deposition; (b) consistent with
the declarant's testimony and is offered to rebut an
express or implied charge against the declarant of
recent fabrication or improper influence or motive;

804

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

or (c) one of identification of a person made after
perceiving him or her.132 (837 R130).133
Hearsay is an out-of-court statement made by
a declarant which is offered to prove the truth of the
matter asserted in the statement.
Q.

What is the hearsay rule?

A.

The hearsay rule provides that hearsay evidence is
inadmissible except as otherwise provided in the
Rules on Evidence. (837 R130).

Q.

Give an example of hearsay.

A.

Pedro sues Dencio for damages when the latter's
car bumped into Pedro's car at an intersection
causing injuries to Pedro. Pedro offers the testimony
of Winnie who will testify that she heard bystander
Sam say that Dencio's car entered the intersection
when the stoplight was red against Dencio.
Dencio's lawyer may object to Winnie's proposed
testimony on the ground that Winnie will be
testifying as to hearsay.
The statement of Sam that Dencio's car
entered the intersection when the light was
stoplight was red is hearsay. Clearly it is offered to
prove the truth that Dencio's car entered the
intersection when the light was red. Winnie is also
testifying as to a fact (Dencio's car entering the
intersection when the light was red) which was
not derived from her own perception but from
Sam's perception.

1320r
as FRE 801 (d)(1)(C) puts it "identifies a person as someone the
declarant perceived earlier."
133This
is a new provision of the 2020 Rules on Evidence providing for a
more precise definition of hearsay.

805

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Note that what is hearsay is the out-of-court
statement or Sam's statement, not Winnie's
testimony reporting Sam's statement. (RICHARD
LEMPERT & STEPHEN SAL TZBURG, A MODERN
APPROACH TO EVIDENCE 359 [2d ed., 1982 3d
reprint 19881). In court practice and in jurisprudence
however the hearsay definition is often extended to
the witness's testimony reporting the out-of-court
statement.
Q.

May hearsay be in written form?

A.

Yes. We often think of hearsay in its oral form but
hearsay may also be in writing. Hence if a party will
present a letter to prove the truth of the contents
thereof without presenting the letter-writer, the letter
would be hearsay. Affidavit of doctor absolving
another doctor from professional negligence is
hearsay where the affiant was not presented in
court. (Rosit v. Davao Doctors Hospital, 7 December
2015, Velasco, J.).

Q.

May hearsay be non-verbal?

A.

Yes. Hearsay may consist of non-verbal conduct if
the same is intended by a person as an assertion.
(FRE 801 [a]).

Q.

In a police lineup, victim from behind a one-way
mirror points to the accused as the one who
assaulted him. The victim dies before trial.
During the trial, the police officer conducting
the lineup is asked who the victim pointed to as
the culprit.May the defense object and if so on
what ground?

A.

Yes the defense may object on the ground of
hearsay. An "out-of-court statement" includes not

806

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

only oral or written assertions but also non-verbal
conduct intended as an assertion. (FRE 801 [a]).
The victim's act of pointing out a person in the
lineup is a nonverbal assertion. It's as if the victim
was saying, "He's the one who assaulted me!" The
proponent may try to fit the identification under the
excited-utterance exception.
 Q.

Prosecution for rape. Dr. Mijares examined the
victim AAA and executeda medical report on his
findings. At the scheduled hearing, Dr. Mijares
appeared,after several subpoenasand warnings
from the court, but instead of presenting him to
be examined on his medical report on the
alleged rape of AAA, the prosecutor manifested
that she was dispensing with his testimony
providedthe defenseagreedto the prosecution's
offer of stipulation that AAA submitted herself to
medical examination one week after the alleged
rape, to which the defense acceded. Is the
medical report hearsay?

A.

Yes, since Dr. Mijares did not testify in court
regarding the same. In fact his testimony was
dispensed with. (People v. Rondina, 30 June 2014).
(Note that the stipulation was not on the
authenticity of the medical report but on the fact
simply that AAA submitted herself to medical
examination one week after the alleged rape).

Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant for damages arising
from tort. Plaintiff offers in evidence a medical
certificate from Dr. X to the effect that Plaintiff
suffered whiplash. Is the medical certificate
admissible in evidence over objection that it
is hearsay?
807

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. Medical certificate that plaintiff suffered from
whiplash injury is hearsay if the physician who
executed it not presented in court. (De/a Liana v.
Biong, 4 Dec 2013, Brion, J.).

Q.

Suit by the heirs of passengersagainstthe ship
company for damagesarising from the sinking
of the ship and the consequentloss of life of all
the passengers and the crew. The plaintiffs
contend that the ship company was negligent
for allowing an unworthy ship to set sail. The
defendant ship company presents a witness
who will testify that he saw the captain taking
his wife and children aboard the ship. Objection
on the ground that the testimony is about
hearsay.Should the objection be sustained?

A.

No. The non-verbal conduct of the captain is not
intended as an assertion. Hence the same is not
hearsay. (FRE 801 [a]). The testimony is admissible
to prove that the captain believed the ship to be
seaworthy since he took his family aboard it.

Q.

Explain the second paragraph of 537 R130
concerning prior out-of-court statement of a
declarant who is subject to cross-examination
at the trial concerningthe statement.

A.

The second paragraph of S37 R130 provides that
even if the declarant is testifying in court and is
subject to cross on his prior out-of-court statement,
such statement is still hearsay unless it falls within
any of the exceptions stated therein. This is a
departure from the traditional rule that an out-ofcourt statement is not hearsay if the declarant will
be presented as a witness in court and subject to
cross-examination concerning such statement.
808

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

S37(a) refers to a prior out-of-court statement
which is inconsistent with the declarant's testimony
and was given under oath subject to the penalty of
perjury at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or in
a deposition. Here the cross-examiner is using the
statement not merely to impeach the witness but to
prove the truth of the matter asserted in the
statement. That is why the statement is required to
be given under oath in order to lend it trustworthiness.
If the cross-examiner is using the statement merely
to impeach the declarant-witness but not as
substantive evidence, there is no need for the prior
statement to be under oath.
The prior consistent statement in S37(b) is
being offered by the party presenting the declarant
to rebut an express or implied charge against the
declarant of recent fabrication or improper influence
or motive.
The statement in S37(c) is one in which the
declarant identifies a person as someone the
declarant perceived earlier.134
Q.

Defense presents DW as witness in which she
testified that accused was not the one who shot
the victim. On cross, she denies making a
contrary statement to police. Prosecution presents
a police investigator who will testify that DW
told him that the accused had shot the victim. Is
DW's statement to the police hearsay?

134S37(a)(b)
and (c) were adopted from FRE 801 (d)(1 ). Even in the U.S.,
these provisions, especially (a) and (b) are considered as extremely complex and
perplexing. It is submitted that a better rule which is more easily applied in
litigation is to consider all prior statements of a declarant as non-hearsay if the
declarant testifies at the trial or hearing and is subject to cross-examination
concerning the statement. This approach is favored by authorities like John
Henry Wigmore, Edmund Morgan, and Charles McCormick.

809

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes. S37(a) R130 requires that the prior
inconsistent statement be given under oath subject
to the penalty of perjury at a trial, hearing, or other
proceeding, or in a deposition, which is not the
case here. Thus DW's prior inconsistent statement
is hearsay. DW's statement to the police may not
be used by the prosecution to prove that the
accused shot the victim but only to impeach OW
pursuant to S11 R132.

Q.

Defense presents DW as witness in which she
testified that accused was not the one who shot
the victim. The prosecution then offers in
evidence the transcript of DW's testimony in a
related civil case wherein DW stated that the
accused was the one who shot the victim. Is
DW's testimony in the civil case hearsay?

A.

No, DW's testimony in the civil case is non-hearsay.
It is DW's prior inconsistent statement given under
oath subject to perjury at a trial. Hence it can be
used to prove that the accused shot the victim.

Q.

Prosecution of accused for rape of X. X testifies
that accused raped her and was cross-examined.
The prosecution then offers the testimony of Y
(X's friend) who will testify that X told her that
she had been raped by the accused. Is Y's
testimony hearsay?

A.

Yes. The declarant-witness's
prior consistent
statement is hearsay even if she was subject to
cross-examination concerning the statement since
it was not offered to rebut an express or implied
charge against the declarant of recent fabrication or
improper influence or motive.

810

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

The prosecution witness identified the accused
as the perpetrator of the murder. On crossexamination, the defense counsel asked the
witness whether he had previously fought with
the accused over a woman. On re-direct,may the
witness testify that he had told an NBI investigator
a few days after the murder that it was the
accused who killed the victim over objection that
such testimony relatedto hearsay?

A.

Yes. The cross-examiner in asking whether the
witness had previously fought with the accused
over a woman was making an implied charge of
improper motive against the witness. Hence the
witness' previous consistent statement is not
hearsay under S37(b) R130.

Q.

In a murder case, X testified that he saw the
accused shoot the victim. The prosecution then
presents the police officer who will testify that X
identified the accused as the gunman. Is the
police officer's testimony hearsay?

A.

No. It is about X's statement identifying a person
(the accused) whom X had perceived earlier.

Q.

What are the reasons for excluding hearsay?

A.

The reasons for
following: (COD)

excluding

hearsay

are

the

(a) The lack of opportunity on the part of the party
against which it is offered to cross-examine the
declarant, that is, the person who made
the statement.
(b) The statement
under oath.

or declaration

811

is not made

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(c) The court does not have the opportunity to
observe the demeanor of the declarant. (Estrada
v. Desierto, G.R. Nos. 146710-15, 3 April 2001 ).
Q.

What are self-serving statements? What is the
proper ground for objecting to self-serving
statements?

A.

Self-serving statements are those made by a party
out of court advocating his own interest. They do
not include a party's testimony in court as a
witness. The proper ground for objecting to selfserving statements is not that they are self-serving
but that they are hearsay. Statements made by a
party in court favoring his interest may not be
objected to as self-serving since the party may be
cross-examined. (People v. Omictin, 26 July 2010).

Q.

What is an independently relevant statement?

A.

An out-of-court statement which is relevant not for the
truth of a matter asserted therein but for something
else, e.g., state of mind, intent, belief, the mere fact of
utterance, or legal effect (SIBUL). Othewise put, the
statement is relevant for something else other than its
truth. Not being hearsay, an independently relevant
evidence is admissible.

Q.

In a petition for the allowance of the will of
deceased Bent, an oppositor presents the
testimony of X to the effect that he had heard
Bent declare that there were Martians in his
backyard. Is Bent's declaration hearsay?

A.

No. It is an independently relevant statement. The
statement is offered to prove not that Martians exist
but that Bent was not of sound and disposing mind.

812

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Another approach is to say that X has personal
knowledge of Bent's declaration although he has no
personal knowledge of the fact that there were
Martians in Bent's backyard. But what is sought to
be proved is the declaration itself, not the presence
of Martians.

Q.

A overheard B call X a thief. In an action for
defamation filed by X against B, is the
testimony of A offered to prove the fact of
utterance, i.e., that B called X a thief, admissible
in evidence? (99 Bar Q17c).

A.

The testimony of A is admissible in evidence.
The Supreme Court has held that a statement
is not hearsay if it is offered not to prove the truth of
the matter asserted therein, but the mere fact
of utterance.
Here the statement of B that X is a thief is not
relevant for its truth but for the fact that it was. uttered
and that X was defamed. It is an independently
relevant statement and hence admissible.

Note:Another approach is to treat B's statement
as non-hearsay since it is an admission by a partyopponent. (FRE 801 [d][2]]). The rationale for this is
that the party against whom the statement is
offered cannot claim that he has a right to crossexamine himself.

Q.

0 sold a parcel of registered land to A. The deed
of sale in favor of A was not registered. 0 then
sold the same parcel of land to B and this sale
was registered. A sues to recover the land from
B who raises the defense that he is an innocent
purchaser for value. A presents as witness W
813

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

for the purpose of testifying that prior to the sale
to B, he (W) had heard a real estate broker tell B
that A had already bought the land from 0. B
objects to the testimony as relating to hearsay.
Should the objection be sustained?
A.

No. Statements of a declarant from which an
inference may be made as to the state of mind of
another, that is, the knowledge, belief, motive,
intention, good or bad faith, etc. of the latter, are
independently relevant and not covered by the
hearsay rule. (Estrada v. Desierto, 3 April 2001;
see 5 MANUEL MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE
RULES OF COURT 289 [1980 ed.]).
Here the
declarant broker's statement shows the knowledge
and bad faith of B and is thus independently
relevant and not covered by the hearsay rule.

Q.

X was charged with robbery. On the strength of
a warrant of arrest issued by the court, X was
arrested by police operatives. They seized from
his person a handgun. A charge for illegal
possession of firearms was also filed against
him. In a press conferencecalled by the police,
X admitted that he had robbed the victim of
jewelry valued at PS00,000.00.
The robbery and illegal possession of
firearm cases were tried jointly. The prosecution
presented in evidence a newspaperclipping of
the report by the reporter who was present
during the press conference stating that X
admitted the robbery. xxx. [The offer in evidence
of the newspaper clipping] was objected to by
the defense.

814

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

(a) Is the newspaper clipping admissible in
evidence against X?
(b) xxx (03 Bar Q18).
A.

(a) The newspaper clipping is not admissible in
evidence against X.
Under the Rules of Evidence, hearsay is
inadmissible in evidence unless it falls within any of
the exceptions.
Here the newspaper clipping of the report is
hearsay since the reporter who wrote the news
account was not presented in court and hence
could not be cross-examined by the accused as to
the accuracy or veracity of his report. Newspaper
articles are hearsay ( State Prosecutors v. Muro,
251 SCRA 111 (1993]; Feria v. Court of Appeals,
G.R. No. 122954, 15 February 2000) even though
the statements reported therein are partyadmissions. (Wright v. Montgomery County, Civil
Action No. 96-4597, U.S. District Court for Eastern
Pennsylvania, Memorandum and Order dated 20
May 2002).
Note: There are two out-of-courtstatements( or
declarants) involved here, that of the accused
admittingthe robberyand that of the reporter reporting
the accused's admission. While the accused's
statement is admissible as an admission, that of the
reporter is hearsay not falling within any exception.
Suggested answers which hold the newspaper
clipping admissible as an admission interest
overlookedthe other declarant, i.e., the reporter.

815

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Suggested answer of the U.P. Law Center
Yes, the newspaper clipping is admissible in
evidence against X. Regardless of the truth or
falsity of the statement, the hearsay rule does not
apply and the statement may be shown where the
fact that it is made is relevant. Evidence as to the
making of such statement is not secondary but
primary, for the statement itself may constitute a
fact in issue or be circumstantially relevant as to the
existence of such fact. ( Gotesco Investment
Corporation v. Chatto, 210 SCRA 18 [1992]).

Comment: In the robbery case, the fact in
issue is whether X had robbed the victim. The
statement that X admitted robbing the victim is
relevant only if offered to prove its truth. Otherwise
it has no independent probative value. This should
be distinguished from a situation where the fact that
a statement was made, regardless of its truth or
falsity, has relevance, as for instance in a libel case
where the defendant's statement calling the plaintiff
a swindler is relevant to the issue of whether the
defendant libeled the plaintiff, even if the statement
is untrue.
Hence the statement is not independently
relevant and should be excluded as hearsay not
falling within any exception.
Q.

Is an online article or blog article offered to
prove the truth of the matter asserted therein
hearsay?

A.

Yes. (See Reyes v. Comelec, G.R. No. 207264, 25
June 2013, Brion, J., dissenting). The reason is that
the declarant or author is not presented in court for
cross-examination by the adverse party.
816

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

P sues D for recovery of title and possession of
land and for the demolition of the improvements
constructed therein. D in his answer alleged
that his father from whom he inherited the
property is the owner of the land and assuming
that his father did not own the land, his father
was a possessor in good faith and thus D has a
right of retention.
a) D offers the testimony of X to prove that his
father owned the land. X will testify that he
heard D's father say to a government
surveyor while in possession of the land
that he was its owner. Is X's testimony
admissible over relevantobjection?
b) Will your answer be the same if the
testimony of X is offered to prove that D's
father was a possessor-in-goodfaith?

A.

a) X's testimony is not admissible over an objection
that it was hearsay.
X's testimony is about the out-of-court
declaration of D's father and is offered to prove the
truth of the matter asserted therein, that D's father
was the owner of the land. Hence the same is
hearsay and inadmissible.
b) My answer would not be the same.
The declaration of D's father is an
independently relevant statement since it was not
offered to prove that D's father was the owner of
the land but that he believed that he was the owner
of the land and thus a possessor in good faith.
Otherwise put the statement is relevant not for its
817

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

truth but to show that D's father believed in
good faith that he was the owner although he
actually was not.
Q.

In Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April
2001, at issue was whether President Estrada
resigned from his position. Submitted to prove
Estrada's intent to resign was the Angara Diary
in which Executive Secretary Edgardo Angara
recorded Estrada's statements in which he said,

"Pagod na pagod na ako. Ayako na, masyado
nang masakit. Pagod na ako sa red tape,
bureaucracy, intriga. I just want to clear my
name, then I will go." Angara himself did not
testify in court. Estrada's lawyers argued that
these statements were hearsay. Were they?
A.

No. The statements are independently relevant, that
is, relevant independently of whether they are true
or not. Independently relevant statements are of
two classes: (1) those statements which are the
very facts in issue, and (2) those statements which
are circumstantial evidence of the facts in issue.
The second class includes statements of a person
showing his state of mind (i.e., his mental condition,
knowledge, belief, intention, ill will, and other
emotions) and statements of a person from which
an inference may be made as to the state of mind
of another.135 The Angara Diary contains statements
135The

Supreme Court's use of this exception (statements of a person
from which an inference may be made as to the state of mind of another) in effect
adopts the controversial doctrine laid down by the U.S. Supreme Court in Mutual
Life Insurance Co. v. Hillman, 145 U.S. 285 (1892) wherein a person's out-ofcourt statements were used to prove not only his intention but the intention of
another person as well. The Hillman doctrine should however be applied to the
special facts in the case but 'should nor be used as a carte blanche for the
holding that the declarant's statement may refer to the state of mind of another
person and not the declarant himself.

818

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

of Erap which reflect his state of mind and are
circumstantial evidence of his intent to resign. It
also contains statements of Secretary Angara from
which one can reasonably infer Erap's intent to
resign. Such statements are independently relevant
and are excluded from the hearsay rule.

Note: The diary itself was hearsay, since the
diarist Angara was not presented in court. It
however contains statements of the declarant
Angara which are independently relevant.
Another approach (requiring less detailed
analysis) with respect to Erap's declarations, are
that the same are admissions of a party-opponent
and hence not hearsay pursuant to FRE 801 (d)(2).
In respect of Angara's statements in the diary, the
same are also not hearsay since they are vicarious
admissions imputable to Erap, Angara being the
executive secretary of Erap and thus his agent.
Q.

Wife and Rolando prosecuted for parricide for
allegedly hiring a bomb-maker who planted a
bomb in the husband's car. The Prosecution
presented witness W who will testify that he
overhearda conversation between Rolando and
the wife that they would fetch a man in Bulacan
who knew how to place a bomb in a vehicle.
Wife and Rolando objected to the testimony for
beinghearsay.Shouldthe objectionbe sustained?

A.

The hearsay rule states that a Witness may not testify as
to what he merely learned from others either because he
was told, or he read or heard the same. The law however
provides for specific exceptions to the hearsay rule. One
is the doctrine of independently relevant statements,
where only the fact that such statements were made is
819

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

relevant, and the truth or falsity thereof is immaterial.136
The hearsay rule does not apply; hence, the statements
are admissible as evidence. Evidence as to the making
of such statement is not secondary but primary, for the
statement itself may constitute a fact in issue or be
circumstantially relevant as to the existence of such a
fact. The witness who testifies thereto is competent
because he heard the same, as this is a matter of fact
derived from his own perception, and the purpose is
to prove either that the statement was made or the
tenor thereof.
In this case, W's testimony that he overhead a
conversation between Rolando and the wife that they
would fetch a man in Bulacan who knew how to place a
bomb in a vehicle is admissible, if only to establish the
fact that such statementwas made and the tenor thereof.
(People v. Malibiran, G.R. No. 178301,24 April 2009).
Note: Another approach is to treat the
statements of Rolando and the wife as partyadmissions, and hence not hearsay.
Q.

Prosecution for murder of X for shooting to
death Z, the lover of X's mother Y. The shooting
occurred in Y's house. X and Y contend that Z
had barged into Y's house uninvited and had
tried to shoot Y, forcing X to shoot Z in defense
of his mother. The prosecution will present W,
Z's son, to testify that he heard his father say
that he was going to Y's house as he was
summoned by Y. The defense objects that W
will be testifying as to hearsay. Should the
objection be sustained?

136As
previously discussed, independently relevant statements are not
exceptions to the hearsay rule but are simply non-hearsay. It is more precise to
say that independently relevant statements are not covered by the hearsay rule.

820

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

No. The statement of Z that he was going to Y's
house as he was summoned by Y is independently
relevant for it shows Z's intent to go to Y's house
and is thus circumstantial evidence that Z did go to
Y's house upon the latter's summons. The
statement thus disproves X and Y's contention that
Z barged into Y's house uninvited. (See Estrada v.
Desierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April 2001; Mutual Life
Insurance Co. v. Hillman, 145 U.S. 285 [18921).

Q.

Prosecution of Magwitch and Compeyson,
members of Dura Lex Pyrex Fraternity, for the
death due to hazing of Pip. Magwitch and
Compeysondeny that they and Dura Lex Pyrex
had anything to do with Pip's demise. The
prosecution offers the testimony of Estella,
Pip's girlfriend, who will testify that hours
before the death of Pip, he (Pip) had called her
and said that he was going to the initiation rites
of Dura Lex Pyrex. The defense objects on the
ground of hearsay. How should the court rule
on the objection?

A.

The court should overrule the objection. The
statement of Pip that he was going to the initiation
rites shows Pip's state of mind or intent and is
independently relevant as circumstantial evidence
that Pip did go to the initiation rites. (See Estrada
v. Oesierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April 2001; Mutual
Life Insurance Co. v. Hillman, 145 U.S. 285 [18921).

Q.

Prosecution of M's son S for the murder of L,
the lover of M. The version of M and S is that L,
without any prior notice, had in a fit of jealous
rage barged into the house of M and had
threatenedto kill her, forcing S to shoot L. The
prosecution presents as its witness D, the
821

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

daughter of L. D will testify that on the day of
the shooting, her father before leaving their
house had told her that he was invited by M to
her house because M wanted to reconcile with
L. The defense objects to D's testimony on what
L said on the ground of hearsay. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

No. The statement of L that he was going to M's
house upon her invitation shows L's state of mind
or intent and is independently relevant as
circumstantial evidence that L did not barge into
M's house but was inveigled by her with the
promise of reconciliation. (See Estrada v. Desierto,
G.R. 146710-15, 3 April 2001; Mutual Life Insurance
Co. v. Hillman, 145 U.S. 285 [1892]).

Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the
qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11,
2009 a text message, which Mabini's estranged
wife Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of
his death, reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u ni
Mabini. Mtgal n nyang piano i2. Mg ingat u bka
ma tsugi k."
(a) xxx
(b) xxx
(c) If Mabini's objection in question B was
overruled, can he object to the presentation
of the text message on the ground that it
was hearsay?
(d) xxx (10 Bar Q1).

822

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.
c) If Mabini's objection in question B was
overruled, he cannot object to the presentation
of the text message on the ground that it
was hearsay.
The Supreme Court has held that statements
showing the declarant's state of mind, such as his
knowledge or belief, are considered as independently
relevant statements and thus not hearsay. (Estrada
v. Desierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April 2001).
Here the text message showed Gregoria's
knowledge or belief that Mabini planned to kill
Emilio. Hence the same is not hearsay and is
admissible in evidence.
Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co. and
designated W as the beneficiary. The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed
by a written notice designating the new
beneficiary sent by the insured and received by
X Insurance Co. before the death of the insured.
After the death of H, Q demanded from X
Insurance Co. the proceeds of the policy,
claiming that she had been designated as the
beneficiary by H as may be seen from a copy of
a written notice signed by H and allegedly
received by X Insurance Co. before H's death.
sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X
Insurance Co. raises the defense that it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required
written notice changing the beneficiaryfrom W to
Q. At the trial, Q did not produce the copy of the
written notice supposedlyreceivedby X Insurance
Q

823

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Co. Instead,Q merely presentedR who testified
that shortlybeforeH's death,H had instructedR to
write to X InsuranceCo. to that effect.
R's testimony was objected to on the
grounds that it was hearsay. Rule on the
objection.137
A.

The objection that R's testimony was hearsay
should be overruled.
Under the Law on Evidence, an independently
relevant statement is not covered by the hearsay
rule. An independently relevant statement is one
which is relevant not for its truth, but for something
else, such as the declarant's state of mind.
Here R's testimony on H's instruction to him is
relevant to show H's state of mind or intent, that is,
his intent to change the beneficiary in the policy.

Q. Maximo filed an action against Pedro, the
administrator of the estate of the deceased
Juan, for the recovery of a car which is part of
the latter's estate. During the trial, Maximo
presented witness Mariano who testified that he
was present when Maximo and Juan agreed that
the latter would pay a rental of P20,000 for the
use of Maximo's car for one month after which
Juan should immediately return the car to
Maximo. Pedro objected to the admission of
Mariano's testimony on the ground of hearsay.
If you were the judge, would you sustain
Pedro's objection? Why? (01 Bar Q17ed).138
Hypothetical is based on Question 9a of the 1978 RemedialLaw Bar Exam.
The bar question was modified by the author by adding hearsay as the

137

138

ground for objection.

824

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A

If I were the judge, I would overrule Pedro's objection.
Under the Law on Evidence, out-of-court
statements which are relevant for their legal effect
or significance are independently relevant statements
and are thus admissible since they are not covered
by the hearsay rule. Examples are out-of-court
statements that constitute or are relevant to the
making of a contract; these are relevant not for their
truth per se but for their legal effect or significance,
i.e., the making or perfection of a contract. The outof-court statements constituting the contract will no
more be hearsay than the printed statements of a
written contract. (RICHARD LEMPERT & STEPHEN
SALTZBURG, A MODERN APPROACH TO
EVIDENCE 359 [2d ed., 1982, 3d reprint 1988]).
Here Juan's statement is relevant for its legal
effect, that is, that a contract of lease was entered
into betweeh him and Maximo.Hence the objection
should be overruled.

Q.

A foreign dog trained to sniff dangerous drugs
from packages, was hired by FDP Corporation,
a door to door forwarder company, to sniff
packages in their depot at the international
airport. In one of the routinary inspections of
packages waiting to be sent to the United States
of America ( USA), the dog sat beside one of the
packages, a signal that the package contained
dangerous drugs. Thereafter, the guards opened
the package and found two (2) kilograms of
cocaine. The owner of the package was arrested
and charges were filed against him. During the
trial, the prosecution, through the trainer who
was present during the incident and an expert
in this kind of field, testified that the dog was
825

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

highly trained to sniff packages to determine if
the contents were dangerous drugs and the
sniffingtechnique of these highly trained dogs
was accepted worldwide and had been
successful in dangerous drugs operations. The
prosecution moved to admit this evidence to
justifythe opening of the package. The accused
objected on the grounds that: (i) the guards had
no personal knowledge of the contents of the
package before it was opened; (ii) the testimony
of the trainer of the dog is hearsay; and (iii) the
accused could not cross-examine the dog.
Decide. (2014 Bar Q13).
A.

Objections overruled.
The objection that the guards had no personal
knowledge of the contents of the package before it
was opened is misplaced. The one testifying is the
trainer not the guards and he had personal
knowledge of the circumstances since he was
present during the incident. The trainer was testifying
as to the contents of the package after it was opened
and not before. Besides there is no rule of evidence
that one cannot testify about the contents of a
package if he did not have prior personal knowledge
of its contents before opening it.
The objection that the testimony of the trainer
of the dog is hearsay is not valid. Hearsay is an
out-of-court declaration made by a person which is
offered for the truth of the matter asserted. ( See
FRE 801 ).
Here what is involved is a dog who is not a
person who can make an out-of-court declaration.
(Lempert & Saltzburg, A MODERN APPROACH TO

826

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

EVIDENCE 370-371 [1982]). A dog is not treated
as a declarant or witness who can be crossexamined. (People v. Centolella, 305 N.Y.S.2d 279
[1969]). Hence testimony that the dog sat beside
the package is not testimony about an out-of-court
declaration and is thus not hearsay.
The objection that the accused could not
cross-examine the dog is without merit. Under the
Constitution, the accused's right of confrontation
refers to witnesses. As previously discussed, a dog
is not a witness who can be cross-examined.
Q.

Is hearsay admissible if not objected to?

A.

Yes. Hearsay if not objected to may be admitted
and considered as sufficient to prove the facts
therein asserted. (Tison v. CA, 276 SCRA 582).
Hearsay alone may be insufficient to establish a
fact but when no objection is made thereto it is, like
any other evidence, to be considered and given the
importance it deserves. (Manliclic v. Ca/aunan,
G.R. 150157, 25 January 2007). Because of a
party's failure to timely object, the evidence
becomes part of the evidence in the case.
Thereafter, all the parties are considered bound by
any outcome arising from the offer of evidence
properly presented. (Advance Paper Corp. v. Arma
Traders Corp., 11 Dec 2013). In Advance Paper
Corp., the SC took into consideration sales
invoices, despite the proponent's failure to present
in court the secretaries who had prepared them,
because the adverse party had failed to timely
object to the offer of the sales invoices on the
ground of hearsay.
In a criminal case, however, hearsay even if not
827

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

objected to should not be accorded any probative
value against the accused because it would violate his
constitutional right of confrontation.(Peop/e v.
Melosantos, 245 SCRA 569, 576 [1995]. See People
v. Mamalias, 328 SCRA 760, 772-773 [2000]).
Q.

What are the exceptionsto the hearsay rule?

A.

Exceptions may be grouped into two: those where
there is a requirement that the declarant is dead or
unable/unavailable to testify (DU requirement) and
those where there is no such requirement.
Unavailability of the declarant means that the
declarant cannot be produced in court by a party
despite diligent efforts, as when he could no longer be
located. Mere refusal to testify is not equivalent to
unavailability as declarant can be subpoenaed,
unless declarant is invoking a constitutional privilege.
Exceptions where there is a DU requirement:
(30 PCF)
1) Dying declaration.
2)

Former testimony or deposition.

3)

Act of declaration about pedigree.

4)

Declaration against interest.

5)

Statement of decedent or person of unsound
mind.

6)

Declaration by child about act or attempted act
of child abuse.

Exceptions where there is no DU requirement:
(RFC CORL)

828

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

1)

Res gestae.

2)

Family reputation.

3)

Common reputation.

4)

Commercial lists.

5)

Official records.

6)

Learned treatises.

7)

Record of regularly conducted business activity.

Q.

Are the exceptions to the hearsay
admissible because they are not hearsay?

A.

No. The exceptions to the hearsay rule are still
hearsay. Nonetheless by reasons of trustworthiness
or necessity, they are admissible in evidence.

Q.

Would the admission of hearsay exceptions
against an accused violate his constitutional
right to confront the witnesses against him?

A.

No. Philippine evidentiary law and jurisprudence
have long recognized the admissibility of hearsay
exceptions against an accused. For instance, dying
declarations are routinely admitted in criminal cases
for murder or homicide against the accused. The
Supreme Court has stated that the dying declarant
is not regarded as a witness whom the accused is
entitled to meet face to face. The Court stated that
the Bill of Rights guarantee to an accused of the
confrontation right was adopted against the already
existing hearsay rule and thus subject to the rule's
well-established exceptions. (United States v. De la
Cruz, 12 Phil. 87 [1908]). Thus testimony by a
police officer on a declarant's statement implicating
an accused was admitted as an excited utterance

829

rule

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

even if there was no satisfactory showing that the
declarant was unavailable to testify.139
In the United States, a similar approach was
taken until the promulgation of the landmark case of
Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), which
circumscribed this approach. The U.S. Supreme
Court ruled that an out-of-court "testimonial"
statement may not be admitted against the accused
as an excited-utterance hearsay exception, where
there was no showing that the declarant was unable
to testify and that the accused had the prior
opportunity to cross-examine the declarant. The
court held that admitting such statement would
violate the accused's confrontation right.140
Dying declaration
Q.

Give the requirements for a dying declaration
to be admissible as an exception to the
hearsay rule.

A.

The requirements for a dying declaration are the
following: (DICC)
a) The declarant is dead.
b) His death is the subject of inquiry in the case.
c) The declaration was made under the consciousness
of an impending death.

139

People

v. Ner, 28 SCRA 1151 (1969). Admittedly, the pronouncement
was obiter considering that there were other pieces of evidence against the
accused.
140See
ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 214-215 (2004 ed.).
See also Gary M. Bishop, Testimonial Statements, Excited Utterances and the
Confrontation Clause: Formulating a Precise Rule after Crawford and Davis, 54
Clev. St. L. Rev. 559 (2006).

830

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

d) The declaration is about
surrounding
circumstances
(S38 R130).

the
of

cause and
his death.

Q.

The accused was charged with robbery and
homicide. The victim suffered several stab
wounds. It appears that eleven hours after the
crime, while the victim was being brought to the
hospital in a jeep, with his brother and a
policemanas companions,the victim was asked
certain questions which he answered, pointing
to the accused as his assailant. His answers
were put down in writing, but since he was in a
critical condition, his brother and the policeman
signed the statement.Is the statementadmissible
as a dying declaration?(99 Bar Q17d).

A.

The statement is admissible as a dying declaration.
Under the Rules of Evidence, a declaration of
a dying person, made under consciousness of an
impending death is admissible as an exception to
the hearsay rule. The Supreme Court has held that
the declarant's consciousness of his impending
death may be shown by the nature and gravity of
his wounds.
Here the victim suffered several stab wounds
and thus it may be inferred that he had
consciousness of his impending death. The fact
that the statement was not signed is immaterial as
there is no requirement that a dying declaration be
put down in writing and if so that it be signed by the
declarant.

Q.

While sleeping under a tree, Kintanar was
stabbed several times by a man, sustaining
multiple stab wounds on his chest with blood
831

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

spurting therefrom. Bathed in his own blood,
Kintanar rushed to his house where he was met
by his wife. Kintanar informed his wife that it
was Gonzaleswho stabbed him. On the way to
the hospital, Kintanar kept on saying that it was
Gonzales who stabbed him. He died while
undergoing surgery at the hospital.
Convicted for the killing of Kintanar,
Gonzalesquestionedthe admission in evidence
of the ante-mortemstatement of Kintanar to his
wife. He argued that from the abovecitedfacts,
there is no indication that the aforesaid
statement was made by the victim under
consciousness of an impending death. Can the
subject statement be considered as a dying
declaration? Why? (93 Bar Q20).
A. Yes the statement may be considered as a dying
declaration.
The Supreme Court has held the declarant's
consciousness of his impending death may be
shown by the nature and gravity of his wounds.
Here the victim suffered several stab wounds
on his chest with blood spurting therefrom and he
was bathed in his own blood. It may thus be
inferred that he had consciousness of his
impending death.
Q.

Two days .before the victim of a stabbing
incident died, he madea statementto the police
identifying the person who had stabbed him.
When asked by the police, the victim addedthat
he did not know if the was going to survive
because the many stab wounds he sustained
were very painful. Is the identification by the
832

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

deceased of his assailant admissible in evidence
as an ante-mortem statement as an exception to
the hearsay rule? (87 Bar QB)
A.

Yes, the deceased's identification of his assailant is
admissible in evidence as an ante-mortem
statement and an exception to the hearsay rule.
The deceased had consciousness of his
impending death as he stated that he did not know
if he was going to survive because of the many
painful stab wounds he suffered and from which
stab wounds he died two days later. (People v.
Sarabia, 127 SCRA 100).

Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the
qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11,
2009 a text message, which Mabini's estranged
wife Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of
his death, reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u ni

Mabini. Mtgal n nyang piano i2. Mg ingat u bka
ma tsugi k."
(a) xxx
(b) xxx
(c) xxx
(d) Suppose that shortly before he expired,
Emilio was able to send a text message to
his wife Graciana reading "Nasaksak ako. D
na me makahinga. Si Mabini ang may gawa
ni2." Is this text message admissible as a
dying declaration? Explain. (10 Bar Q1).

833

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

Yes the text message is admissible as a dying
declaration. The text message was made by Emilio
under consciousness of an impending death. This
is shown by his statement that he could no longer
breathe. It also related to the cause of his death,
that is, his stabbing by Mabini.

Q.

At A's trial for B's murder, the defense attempts
to present as its witness B's widow, X. She is to
testifythat just before B died, she approached his
sprawled and bloodied husband and asked who
stabbed him. B, conscious of his impending
death, named Y as his assailant. The prosecution
moves to stop X from testifying because her
testimony (1) is hearsay, and (2) will be violative
of the rule on privileged marital communication.
Rule on the prosecution's motion. Explain. (96
Bar Q15-1).

A.

Prosecution's motion to stop X from testifying is
denied.
While X's testimony on what B said is indeed
hearsay, it is however a dying declaration which is
an exception to the hearsay rule. B's declaration
related to the circumstances of his death and he
was conscious of his impending death. Being
excepted from the hearsay rule, B's dying
declaration is admissible in evidence. (837 R 130).
X's testimony on what B had told her is not
covered by the rule on privileged marital
communication. Such rule cannot be invoked if the
communication was not intended to be kept in
confidence as in the case of a dying declaration
wherein the declarant's purpose is to identify his
assailant. (U.S. v. Antipolo, 37 Phil. 726).
834

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Jose was shot and mortally wounded. Before he
expired, he declared thus: "Juan said it was
Pedro who shot me." Would such declaration
be admissible as a dying declaration?

A.

No, since the declarant must be otherwise competent.
Here the declaration of Jose is clearly hearsay.

Q.

A group of three persons, A, B, and C, robbed a
house in a barrio. When they were fleeing after
the robbery, they were intercepted by the
police. Shots were fired, and A was mortally
wounded. Before he passed away, but conscious
of his impending death, he admitted his
participation in the robbery, and named B and C
as his companions. Was the statement of A
ante mortem and entitled to weight as such?
Explain. (80 Bar Q12).

A.

No, the statement of A was not ante mortem and
entitled to weight as such.
A requirement for the admissibility of an ante
mortem statement or a dying declaration is that the
declaration is about the cause and surrounding
circumstances of the declarant's death.
Here A's statement is not about the cause and
surrounding circumstances of his death but of who
his companions were during the robbery. Hence A's
statement is hearsay and not admissible as a dying
declaration. Not being admissible it is not entitled
to any weight.141

The reader is invited to resolve the issues of whether A's statement is

141

admissible as (a) a vicarious admission of a co-conspirator, (b) as part of the res
gestae or (c) as a declaration against interest.

835

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q. Accused stabbed the victim twice in the chest. The
victim went home and told his brother, under
labored breathing, that it was the Accused who
stabbed him. The victim was brought to the
hospital, where he was given medical care.
However he expired seven days later from the
wounds he sustained. May the brother's testimony
regarding the victim's statement to him be
admitted in evidence over a hearsay objection?
A.

Yes. The victim, after being stabbed by appellant
twice on the chest, went home and under labored
breathing, told his brother that it was the Accused
who had stabbed him. Clearly, the statement made
was an expression of the cause and the surrounding
circumstances of his death, and under the
consciousness of impending death. It is of no
moment that the victim died seven days from the
stabbing incident and after receiving adequate care
and treatment, because the apparent proximate
cause of his death, the punctures in his lungs, was a
consequence of Accused's stabbing him in the
chest. (People v. Rarugal, 16 January 2013,
Leonardo-De Castro, J.).

Statement of decedent or person of unsoundmind
Q.

Discuss the
hearsay exception regarding
statement of decedent or person of unsound mind.

A.

In an action 142 against an executor or administrator
or other representative of a deceased person, or

142Although
the provision uses the word "action" it should be read as
covering not only an action against the executor or administrator under R87 but
also the filing of a money claim against the estate of a decedent under R86. This
can be gleaned from the phrase "upon a claim or demand against the estate of
such deceased person."

836

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

against a person of unsound mind, upon a claim or
demand against the estate of such deceased
person or against such person of unsound mind,
where a party or assignor of a party or a person in
whose behalf a case is prosecuted testifies on a
matter of fact occurring before the death of the
deceased person or before the person became of
unsound mind, any statement of the deceased or
the person of unsound mind, may be received in
evidence if the statement was made upon the
personal knowledge of the deceased or the person
of unsound mind at a time when the matter had
been recently perceived by him and while his
recollectionwas clear. Such statement, however, is
inadmissible if made under circumstances
indicating its lack of trustworthiness. (839 R130).
This is a new hearsay exception laid down in
the 2020 Rules on Evidence.
Q.

Pedro filed an an action to recover property
against the administrator of the estate of Dinggoy.
a) In such action, may Pedro testify that
Dinggoy had encroached on his property
and taken possessionwithout his consent?
b) In the action filed by Pedro against the
administrator, may the administrator present
a witness who will testify that Dinggoy had
told him that Pedro had a week earlier sold
the property to Dinggoy, over objection that
such testimony is about hearsay?

A.
a) Yes. The Dead Man's Rule under the former
823 R 130 was deleted under the 2020 Rules on
837

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Evidence. Hence Pedro may testify on an
ante-mortem fact.
b) Yes. The statement of Dinggoy is not hearsay
since Pedro had testified on an ante-mortem
fact. Hence the statement of of the deceased
Dinggoy may be received in evidence since the
matter had been recently perceived by him and
his recollection was clear. There was no
showing that Dinggoy's statement lacked
trustworthiness.
Q.

What is the hearsay exception regarding records
of regularlyconductedbusiness activity?

A.

A memorandum, report, record or data compilation
of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses,
made by writing, typing, electronic, optical or other
similar means at or near the time of or from
transmission or supply of information by a person
with knowledge thereof, and kept in the regular
course or conduct of a business activity, and such
was the regular practice to make the memorandum,
report, record, or data compilation by electronic,
optical or similar means, all of which are shown by
the testimony of the custodian or other qualified
witnesses, is excepted from the rule on hearsay
evidence. (S45 R130, as amended by the 2020
Rules on Evidence).

Q.

Discuss the changes brought about by the new
provisionon hearsay exception regarding records
of a regularly conducted business activity.

A.

The new provision provides for a uniform rule
regarding business records. Before there was a
bifurcated approach regarding business records:
S43 R130 for non-electronic business records and
838

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

R8 of the Rules on Electronic Evidence (REE) on
electronic business records.143 The new 845 R130
provides for a uniform approach since 845 R 130
applies to both electronic and non-electronic
business records. This can be seen from the phrase
"made by writin~, typing, electronic, optical or other
similar means."44 Thus the former provision on
business entries was deleted from the new Rules
on Evidence. In effect the 2020 Rules on Evidence
adopted the rule in R8 REE.
A significant change or innovation under 845
R130 is that the availability or unavailability of the
entrant is no longer material. Under the former 843
R 130 on business entries, it was required that the
entrant be dead or unavailable to testify.
Furthermore, the entrant need no longer have
personal knowledge of the information he is
recording, it being sufficient that the record is made
by or from transmission or supply of information by
a person with knowledge thereof. Under the former
843 R130, it was required that the entrant "was in a
position to know the fact therein stated."
Business records are no longer considered
as prima facie evidence. Under the former 843
R130, business entries were received as prima
facie evidence.
Q.

What are the conditions for the admission
of a business record as an exception to the
hearsay rule?

R8 REE was based on FRE 803(6).
4while S45 R130 states in another part that "such was the regular
practice to make the memorandum, report, record, or data compilation by
electronic, optical or similar means," it is evident that the omission of "writing,
typing" in this part of the provision was simply a drafting oversight.
143

14

839

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.
1) There is a memorandum, report, record or data
compilation
of acts, events,
conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made by writing, typing,
electronic, optical or other similar means
2) The memorandum etc. is made at or near the
time of the act, event, etc.
3) The memorandum etc, is made by, or from
transmission or supply of information by, a
person with knowledge of the act, event, etc.
4) The memorandum, etc. is kept in the regular
course or conduct of a business activity.
5) It was the regular practice of the business
activity to make the memorandum, report,
145
record, or data compilation by writing, typing,
electronic, optical or similar means.
6) All of the foregoing conditions are shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified
witnesses. (845 R130).
Q.

What is the foundation testimony for the
admission of a businessrecords exception?

A.

A custodian or other qualified witness must testify that
the conditions for the admission of the business
records exception under 845 R 130 are present.

Q.

What is meant by "business activity" under 545
R130?

A.

"Business activity" should not be confined to
activiities of a commercial enterprise. It should

145The
words in italics have been inserted by the author. Their omission in
the text of 845 R130 is clearly a drafting oversight.

840

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

include activities of any profession, occupation, and
calling of every kind, whether or not conducted for
profit or for legitimate purposes. (See R2[b] REE).
Thus the logbook of a security guard is
deemed a business record. Even a housewife's
budget journal is a business record. The business
or enterprise maybe legal or illegal. Thus the diary
of a jueteng bookie where he kept records of bets
and winnings is a business record and admissible
to prove the contents thereof if the bookie is dead
or unable to testify.
Q.

Is routineness and  repetitiveness of the
business record a requirement for the business
records exception?

A.

No longer. While routineness and repetitiveness
were important in the business entries exception
under the former 843 R 130, they have been deemphasized in the present 845 R130. This is
shown by the fact that records of diagnoses or
opinions are included in the business records
exception. What is important is that the records
were kept in the regular course or conduct of a
business activity.

Q.

Give examples of business records.

A.

Entries in the following: Books of account, invoices,
statements of account, bills of lading, log-book of a
security guard, medical charts by nurses, interns or
resident physicians in a hospital.

Q.

May the admissibility of a business record
be challenged on the ground of lack of
trustworthiness?

841

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

It is submitted that it may be. Under the REE, The
adverse party may challenge the admissibility of an
electornic business record by evidence of the
untrustworthiness of the source of information or
the method or circumstances of the preparation,
transmission or storage thereof. (See S2 R8 REE).
Under FRE 801(6) from which S45 R130 was
based, the opponent may show that the source of
information or the method or circumstances of
preparation of the business record indicate a lack of
trustworthiness. For instance the opponent may
show that the business record was prepared for
purposes of litigation rather than recordkeeping.
The burden of showing untrustworthiness is on the
adverse party or opponent, not on the proponent.

Q.

Are business records prima facie evidence of
the facts stated therein?

A.

No longer under the 2020 Rules on Evidence. (S45
R130).

Q.

May a medical certificate qualify under the
business records exception?

A.

No. Medical certificates which are issued upon the
request of a patient and which certify that the patient
is suffering from an ailment or injury are hearsay
unless the doctor who issued the certificate is also
presented in court. It cannot be said that the
certificate was issued in the doctor's professional
capacity or in the performance of a duty. However, it
is submitted that statements made for purposes of
medical diagnosis or treatment and describing
medical history, or past or present symptoms, pain, or
sensations, or the inception or general character of
the cause or external source thereof insofar as
842

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

reasonably pertinent to diagnosis or treatment are
excepted from the hearsay rule. (FRE 803[4]). Under
FRE 803(4), these statements are admissible even if
the declarant is available as a witness.
Also a record of medical diagnoses or opinions
are admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule
under S45 R 130 which specifically mentions
"opinions, or diagnoses."
Q.

May a diary qualify as a business
exception?

A.

It depends on the purpose for or the manner by
which the diary was kept. A diary kept in the course
of the diarist's business activity, occupation, or
calling would qualify under the business-entry
exception. Thus a diary by a casino dealer of tips
he received from customers would qualify under
this exception as would a desk calendarappointment diary. (Keogh v. Commissioner of
Internal Revenue, 713 F.2d 496). On the other
hand, a diary of doings for one's personal
satisfaction would probably not qualify. (ANTONIO
R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 251 [2004 ed.]).

Q.

Two days after a railroad crossing accident, the
train engineer gave a written statement at a
freight office of the railroad company where he
was interviewed by the assistant superintendent.
The train engineer died before the trial. May his
statement be given in evidence as a business
record exception?

A.

No. A business entry must relate to the business of
the enterprise. The business of the company is the
railroad business. An accident report may affect a
business in a sense that it affords information on
843

record

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

which management may act. It is not however
typical of entries made systematicallyor as a matter
of routine to record events or occurrences,to reflect
transactions with others, or to provide internal
controls. Simply put the accident report is not one
in the regular course of business. Unlike payrolls,
accounts receivables, bills of lading, and the like,
these reports are calculated for use essentially in
the court, not in the business. Their primary utility is
in litigating not railroading. (Palmer v. Hoffman, 318
U.S. 109 [1943], cited in ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC EVIDENCE251-253 [2004 ed.]).
Electronic business records exception under the REE
Q.

What is the electronic business records
exception under the REE?

A.

A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation
of acts, conditions, events, diagnoses, or opinions
made by electronic, optical, or other similar means
at or near the time by or from transmission or
supply of information by, a person with knowledged
thereof, and kept in the regular course or conduct
of a business activity, and such was the regular
practice to make the memorandum, etc., by
electronic, optical or similar means, all of which are
shown by the testimony of the custodian or other
qualified witness, is excepted from the hearsay rule.
(S1 R8 REE).
With the passage of the new S45 R 130 on the
2020 Rules on Evidence, S1 R8 REE has become
redundant since S45 R130 applies to both nonelectronic and electronic documents.

844

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Former testimony or deposition
Q.

What are the requirements in order for a
testimonyor deposition at a former proceeding
(judicial or administrative) to be admissible as
an exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are: (PDSC)
(a) The witness or deponent is dead or out of the
Philippines or who cannot, with due diligence,
be found therein, or is unavailable or otherwise
unable to testify.
(b)

The former case or proceeding involves the
same parties and subject matter.

(c) The adverse party had the opportunity to crossexamine the witness or deponent in the former
case or proceeding. (S49 R130, 2020 Rules
on Evidence).
Q.

Compare the rule on former testimony or
deposition under 549 R130 to that in criminal
cases under S1(f) R115.

A.

The rule on former testimony or deposition under S49
R130 is substantially similar to that in criminal cases
(S 1 [f] R 115) with the notable distinction that a
deposition is not mentioned in S 1 (f) R 115. Taking into
account the constitutional right of confrontation, it is
opined that the difference should be interpreted in
favor of the accused, that is, a deposition in another
case or proceeding is inadmissible against the
accused for being hearsay.

845

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Are statements made during preliminary
investigation covered by the former testimony
or deposition exception?

A.

No, since there is no right to cross-examine during
preliminary investigation. (S3(e) R112).

Q.

P filed an action for collection against D (Case
1) with the deposition of X being taken therein.
The court dismissed Case 1 and the order of
dismissal became final and executory. P filed
Case 2 against D. Case 2 involves the same
subject matter. May P introduce in Case 2 the
deposition of X if any of the circumstances in
Section 4(c)(1) to (5) of R23 are present?

A.

Yes. Under S5 R23, when an action has been
dismissed and another action involving the same
subject is afterward brought between the same
parties or their representatives or successors in
interest, all depositions lawfully taken and duly filed
in the former action may be used in the latter as if
originally taken therefor.146

Q.

P vs. A in a civil case with the deposition of X
being taken therein before trial. During the trial
may P introduce in evidence against A the
deposition of X even if X is not dead or unable
to testify?

A.

Yes provided that P is able to show that any of the
circumstances in S4(c) R23 is present. An example
would be if X resides more than 100 kilometers
6The requirement that the prior action must have been dismissed before

14

depositions taken for use in it can be used in a subsequent action was
considered an oversight by U.S. courts who have ignored this requirement. See
Wright & Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil 2150. What is important
is that the second action involves the same parties and subject matter.

846

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

from the place where he is to testify or if P, upon
application and notice, is able to show that such
exceptional circumstances exists as to make it
desirable, in the interest of justice and with due
regard to the importance of presenting the
testimony of X in open court, to allow the deposition
to be used (S4[c] R23). Take note that since the
deposition was taken in the same case, it is S4(c)
R23 and not 849 R130 which governs.
Q.

Jovita hired Pacita as her househelp. Pacita
was prosecuted for qualified theft for stealing
Jovita's jewelry (Case1 ). Jovita testified in Case
1 that Pacita had confessed to her that she had
sold the jewelry to Francisco. Pacita was
convicted in Case 1. Subsequentlya prosecution
for violation of the anti-fencing law (Case2) was
brought against Francisco. In the preliminary
investigation of Case 2, Pacita testified and
executed an affidavit wherein she stated that
she had sold the jewelry to Francisco. During
the trial, the prosecution no longer presented
Jovita and Pacita as witnesses.
a) Is Jovita's testimony in Case 1 admissible
against Francisco?
b) Are Pacita's testimony and affidavit in the
preliminaryinvestigationof Case2 admissible
against Francisco?

A.

a)

No. Jovita's testimony in Case 1 is hearsay. It
bears stressing that Francisco was not a party
(accused) in Case 1. Jovita did not reiterate her
testimony in Case 2 nor was Pacita presented
as a witness therein to testify on the admission

847

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

she purportedly made to Jovita. Thus there was
no opportunity to cross-examine Pacita.
b)

Q.

No. Pacita's testimony and affidavit in the
preliminary investigation of Case 2 are hearsay
against Francisco since there is no opportunity
to cross-examine in preliminary investigation.
(Francisco v. People, G.R. No. 146584, 12
July 2004).

P was hit by the bus of X company. A criminal
case for reckless imprudence was filed against
the bus driver Y upon complaint of P. While the
criminal case was pending, P filed a tort case
against X company. Subsequently Y was
acquitted on ground that he was not negligent.
a) May P introduce in evidence against X
company the testimony of a witness in the
criminal case over objection that it is hearsay?
b) Assuming that Y was convicted, is the
judgment of conviction admissible against X
company in a proceeding brought to enforce
X company's subsidiary liability?

A.
a) No. The testimony of a witness in a prior
criminal case for reckless imprudence against
the employee (bus driver) cannot be introduced
in a subsequent civil case for tort filed by the
offended party against the employer (bus
company) to enforce the latter's vicarious
liability under Article 2180 of the Civil Code.
This is because the employer is not a party in
the criminal case and thus had no opportunity to
cross-examine the witness.
848

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

However where the employer failed to object to
the TSNs when they were offered in evidence, the
same are admissible. The driver's acquittal is of no
moment since the tort case is an independent civil
action. (Manliclic v. Calaunan, 25 January 2007).
b) Yes. A judgment of conviction of the employee is
however conclusive upon the employer in a
motion or action to enforce the employer's
subsidiary liability under Article 103 of the Revised
Penal Code and said judgment is admissible in
evidence in the proceedings brought to enforce
the employer's subsidiary liability.
Q.

In 1987, the Republic, through the PCGG,filed
Civil Case No. 0009,an action for reconveyance
and reversion, against Jose Africa, Ferdinand
Marcos, Imelda Marcos, Juan Ponce Enrile, et
al. The complaint alleges that shares in Eastern
Telecommunications Philippines Inc. (ETPI)
were illegally acquired for the beneficial interest
of the Marcoses. Subsequently Victor Africa,
the son of Jose Africa who had died, filed Civil
Case No. 0130 with the Sandiganbayanagainst
the PCGG seeking to nullify the PCGG orders
asking him to surrender the ETPIshares and to
desist from acting as an ETPI director and
shareholder.
Subsequently the SB ordered the
consolidation of CC No. 0009 with several
incident cases including CC No. 0130. The
PCGG in CC No. 0130 took the deposition of
Maurice Bain, a former officer of ETPI, before
the Philippine Consul General in London,
England. The deposition was sought to be
introduced by the PCGG in CC No. 0009. The
849

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Respondents objected on the ground that the
deposition did not comply with 547 R130 which
requires identity of parties, they not having
been parties to CC No. 0130. The PCGG on the
other hand argues that since CC No. 0009 and
CC No. 0130 were consolidated, the actions
were merged into one and hence it is 54(c) R23
and not 549 R130 which applies. Under 54(c)
R23 the deposition may be introduced in
evidence for any purpose if the deponent is
outside of the Philippines. Is the deposition
admissible in CC No. 0009?
A.

No. The consolidation here was merely for purposes
of joint trial but each case retained its separate
character and required the entry of a separate
judgment. The consolidation did not merge CC No.
0009 and CC No. 0130 into a single action and
cause the parties in one to be the parties to another.
Thus the deposition was not taken in CC No. 0009
but in a separate or former proceeding, CC No.
0130, in which case the requirements of S49 R130
requiring identity of parties applies.
Since the
Respondents were not parties to CC No. 0130, the
deposition taken therein was hearsay as against
them and inadmissible upon proper and timely
objection. (Republic v. Sandiganbayan,
G.R.
152375, 16 December 2011 ).147

1471n
his dissent, Justice Antonio Carpio states that the notice to take
deposition was made in CC No. 0009 as indicated in the caption of the notice to
take deposition which states "Civil Case No. 0009 (Incident Case No. 0130)."
Besides the notice stated that it was also going to be used in CC 0009. Thus
S4(c) R23 was applicable and the deposition can be used in lieu of Bane's incourt testimony.

850

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Act or declaration about pedigree
Q.

What are the requirements in order for an act or
declaration about pedigree to be admissible as
an exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are: (DRAPE)
a) The declarant is dead or unable to testify.
b) The act or declaration is about pedigree of
another person related to the declarant by birth,
adoption, or marriage or, in the absence
thereof, with whose family he or she was so
intimately associated as to be likely to have
accurate information concerning his pedigree.148
c) The relationship between the relative and the
declarant is shown by evidence other than such
act or declaration.
d) The act or declaration occurred before the
controversy (ante litem motam). (S41 R130,
2020 Rules on Evidence).

Q.

What does pedigree in 541 R130 mean?

A.

The word "pedigree" includes relationship, family
genealogy, birth, marriage, death, the dates when
and the places were these facts occurred, and the
names of the relatives. It embraces also facts of
family history intimately connected with pedigree.
(S41 R130).

Q.

Give an example of act or declaration about
pedigree as a hearsay exception.

148The
words in italics have been added by the 2020 amendments to the
Rules on Evidence.

851

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

In the settlement of the estate of deceased Pedro,
Ruben who claims to be the son of Pedro will
present witness W. W will testify that he heard Jose
say that his brother Pedro had a son named
Ruben. Jose is already dead at the time of W's
testimony. Here Jose's declaration concerns the
pedigree of his relative (brother) Pedro, that is, that
Pedro has a son named Ruben.

Q.

In the preceding example, must the relationship
between Pedro and Jose be shown by evidence
other than Jose's declaration?

A.

Yes. The law requires that the person whose pedigree
is the subject of the declaration must be related to the
declarant by birth or marriage and that such
relationship is shown by evidence other than such act
or declaration. Hence Jose's declaration that Pedro is
his brother is not competent proof of their relationship.
There must be preliminary evidence other than the
declaration that Pedro is Jose's brother. The
preliminary proof will lay the foundation for the
introduction of the main evidence, that is, that Pedro
had a son named Ruben.

Q.

In the settlement of the estate of deceased
Pedro, Ruben who claims to be the son of
Pedro will present witness W. W will testify that
he heard Pedro say that he has a son named
Ruben. Is evidence other than Pedro's declaration
needed in order to prove the relationship
between Pedro and Ruben?

A.

No. Where the pedigree of a person subject of the
declaration is that person's own relationship to the
declarant, it seems absurd to require, as a
foundation for the admission of the declaration,

852

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

proof of the very fact which the declaration is
offered to establish. The preliminary proof would
render the main evidence unnecessary. (Tison v.
Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 121027, 31 July 1997;
see also Hartman's Estate, 107 P 105 cited in
Moran, Comments on the Rules of Court, Vol. 5,
1980 ed., 322). The basis for the exception then is
logic. The other basis for the exception is necessity,
that is to prevent a failure of justice since the
declarant, whose estate is in controversy, is dead.
(Tison v. Court of Appeals, id.).
Q.

Settlement of the estate of deceased Pedro.
Simon, who claims to be the grandson of Pedro
will present witness W. W will testify that
Pedro's son Ruben (who predeceased Pedro)
had said that he has a son named Simon; Is
evidence other than Ruben's declarationneeded
in order to prove the relationship between
Ruben and Simon?

A.

Yes. While the declaration is about the declarant
Ruben's own relationship to Simon, the latter is
however not claiming from Ruben's estate but from
the estate of Pedro by virtue of the right of
representation.Hence the considerationof necessity
which was the basis for the Tison ruling is not
present since it is not Ruben's estate which is in
controversy. In other words the exception does not
apply where the claimant does not seek to claim
from the estate of the declarant himself and but
merely to establish a right through his declarations
to the property of some other member of the family.
(Tison v. Court of Appeals, id.)

853

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

After the estate of the late Luciano Raval had
been distributed by a court order to his widow
and children, Danilo Casim sued the latter for
recovery of his inheritance as an alleged
illegitimate child of the deceased. The only
evidence he introduced during the trial to prove
that he was the son of Luciano Ravalwas the
testimony of Maria Seva. Over the vigorous
objection of counsel for the defendants that
Seva's testimony was hearsay evidence, the
court allowed her to testify that she was the
godmother of Danilo Casim; that during the
baptismal party, she was introduced to Luciano
Raval; and that the latter confessed to her on
that occasion that he, Luciano Raval, was the
father of Danilo Casim.
When counsel for Danilo Casim announced
that he had no further evidenceand that he was
submitting his case on the basis of the
testimony of Maria Seva, the counsel for the
defendants promptly moved that the testimony
of Maria Seva be stricken from the records on
the ground that her testimony was hearsay
evidenceand therefore inadmissible. The court,
however, ruled that the testimony was
admissible and should remain on the record.
Explain why the court was correct or in
error, as the case may be, in initially admitting
in evidence the testimony of Maria Seva and
in subsequently maintaining its admissibility.
(83 Bar Q8).

A.

The court was correct in admitting Maria Seva's
testimony over the objection that it was hearsay.
854

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Under the Rules on Evidence, the declaration
of a deceased person in respect to the pedigree of
another person related to him by birth may be
received in evidence where it occurred before
the controversy.
Here the declaration of Luciano related to the
pedigree of Danilo Casim who was Luciano's son.
Independent and preliminary evidence of Luciano's
relationship to Danilo is not necessary since
Luciano's declarationwas about his own relationship
to Danilo.149
Declaration against interest
Q.

What are the requirements in order that a
declaration against interest will be considered
as an exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are:
a) The declarant must be dead or unable to testify.
b)

The declaration must be against the interest
(pecuniary, moral, or penal) of the declarant.

c) The fact asserted in the declaration was at the
time it was made so far contrary to declarant's
own interest, that a reasonable man in his
position would not have made the declaration
unless he believed it to be true.
d) A statement tending to expose the declarant to
criminal liability and offered to exculpate the
accused is not admissible unless corroborating
149Had
the case been filed on or after the effectivity of the Family Code on 3
August 1988, the action, which in effect seeks to establish Danilo Casim's illegitimate
filiation, would have already prescribed since it should have been brought during the
lifetimeof Luciano, the alleged parent. (Art. 175, Family Code).

855

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness
of the statement. (840 R130, 2020 Rules
on Evidence)150
Q.

Distinguish a declaration against interest from a
party admission.

A.

DECLARATION AGAINST
INTEREST

PARTY ADMISSION

Made by a non-party, i.e., the
declarant.

Made by a party.

Must be against the
declarant's interest.

Need not be against the
admitter's interest.

Hearsay but admissible as an
exceotion to the hearsav rule.

Not hearsay and thus
admissible.

The declarant must be dead
or unable to testify.

No requirement that the
admitter is dead or
unable to testifv.

Admissible against declarant
and third persons.

Admissible only
acainst the admitter.

Q.

N had a disagreement with O and P over a
parcel of land. The exchange of words led to a
bolo duel between N and O in which N was
killed and O was fatally wounded. Before O died
he made a written statement before the
Municipal Judge of the town that it was he who
killed N and that he alone was involved against
N in the duel. A case for homicide was
presented against P on the theory that he
participated in the fight since he was also
1

Wrhe

fourth requirement was added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

856

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

involved in the exchange of words and was at
the scene of the crime. P offered as part of his
defense the written statement of 0, which the
trial court ruled to be inadmissible as being
contrary to the hearsay rule. Should such
evidence have been disallowed and denied
admission? Why? (81 Bar QB).
A.

No the evidence should have been admitted. While
O's declaration is not admissible as a dying
declaration since it was not about the circumstances
of O's demise but of another person's, it should have
been admitted as a declaration against interest. O's
declaration was against his penal or pecuniary
interest. (People v. Toledo, 51 Phil 825).151

Q.

Allan and Narita were married on 1 August .1989.
After 2 months Narita, in order to spite Allan,
told him in the presence of their friends that the
10-year-old Liza whom she claimed to be her
niece was actually her daughter by a certain
Basilio, a married man.
In 1992,Narita filed a petition for declaration
of nullity of her marriageto Allan. The trial court
nullified the marriage.The decision nullifying the
marriagewas appealedand Naritadied during the
pendencyof the appeal. Soon after, the legal wife
of Basilio sued for legal separation based on
sexual infidelity in view of Basilio's love affair
with Narita. At the trial Allan was called by
Basilio's wife to testify that Naritatold him (Allan)
during their marriagethat Liza was her love child

151Assuming
the applicability of the fourth requisite of declaration against
interest, the statement would have been admissible. The circumstances indicate
the statements' trustworthiness since it could also be considered as part of the
res gestae.

857

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

by Basilio. Counsel for Basilio objected on the
ground that Allan's testimony would be hearsay.
a) If you were the judge, how would you rule on
the objection?
b) Would your answer be different if Narita had
not died?

A.

a) I would overrule the objection.
The statement of Narita that she had a love child
by Basilio is a declaration against interest which is an
exception to the hearsay rule. The declaration is
against Narita's moral or penal interest.
b) My answer would be different. Since there is no
showing that Narita is unable to testify, her
statement would not qualify as a declaration
against interest and would thus be hearsay.

Q.

Plaintiff Rogelio Dantis filed an action for
recovery of possession of land against
Defendant. Defendant introduced an affidavit of
Plaintiff's late grandfather Ignacio Dantis, wherein
Ignacio said that his son Emilio (Plaintiff's father)
had sold the land to Defendant's father. May the
court admit the affidavit into evidence over a
hearsay objection?

A.

No. The affidavit is hearsay. It does not qualify as
a declaration against interest because the
declaration was not against the declarant's interest
but against that of his son. It was not the
declaration of the seller himself but of his father.
(Dantis v. Maghinang, 10 April 2013). Besides, the
act of selling is not one "which at the time it was
made was so far contrary to the declarant's own
interest, that a reasonable man in his position

858

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

would not have made the declaration unless he
believed it to be true."
Q.

State the hearsay exception in child abuse cases.

A.

A statement made by a child describing any act or
attempted act of child abuse, not otherwise
admissible under the hearsay rule, may be
admitted in evidence in any criminal or non-criminal
proceeding subject to the rules laid down in Section
28 of the RECW.

Q.

What are the requirementsfor the admission of
a child's statement describing any act or
attempted act of child abuse? (CC DuCK)

A.

1) The statement must be made by a child.
2) The statement describes any act or attempted
act of child abuse.
3) The child is unavailable to testify. "Unavailable"
means that the child declarant
a) is dead.
b) suffers from physical infirmity,
memory, or mental illness.
c)

lack,

of

will be exposed to severe psychological injury.

d) is absent from the hearing and the
proponent of his statement has been unable
to procure his attendance by process or
other reasonable means. (OAP MMS)
4) The hearsay statement is corroborated by other
admissible evidence.

859

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

5) The proponent shall make known to the adverse
party the intention to offer such statement and
its particulars to provide him a fair opportunity
to object.
Q.

What are the factors that the court shall
consider in ruling on the admissibility of the
child's statement?

A.

In ruling on the admissibility of such hearsay
statement, the court shall consider the time, content
and circumstances thereof which provide sufficient
indicia of reliability. It shall consider the following
factors: (LCM SFC MT)
(1) Whether there is a motive to lie.
(2) The general character of the child declarant.
(3) Whether more than one person heard the
statement.
(4) Whether the statement was spontaneous.
(5) The timing of the statement and the relationship
between the child declarant and witness.
(6) Cross-examination could not show the lack of
knowledge of the child declarant.
(7) The possibility of faulty recollection of the child
declarant is remote.
(8) The circumstances surrounding the statement
are such that there is no reason to suppose
the child declarant misrepresented
the
involvement of the accused.

860

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Part of the res gestae
Q.

State the res gestae exception.

A.

The res gestae exception covers statements which
are admissible in evidence as part of the res
gestae. It actually consists of two exceptions: (1)
excited utterances, and (2) verbal acts.

Q.

Define the term "excited utterances" as a
hearsay exception.

A.

Statements made by a person while a startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto, under the stress of excitement
caused by the occurrence152
regarding the
circumstances thereof, may be given in evidence as
part of the res gestae. (S44 R130).

Q.

Mr. Carrascoso took an Air France flight from
Manilato Rome.While on a stop-over in Bangkok,
he was forcibly transferred from the first class to
the tourist class in order to makeway for "a white
man." Mr. Carrascoso resisted his transfer and a
commotion occurred on board the plane. The
purser recordedthe incident in his notebook. Mr.
Carrascososued Air France. During the trial, Mr.
Carrascosotestified that after his forcible transfer
to the tourist class, he went to the pantry where
the purser told him that he (the purser) had
recorded the incident in his notebook; then the
purser read out the entry to him: "First-class
passengerwas forced to go to the tourist class
against his will, and that the captain refused to
intervene." Assume that Air France's counsel

152The
italicized phrase was added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence. This
expressly incorporates into the provision case law that the statement was made
while under the influence of the startling occurrence.

861

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

moved to strike out the statement regarding what
the purser said on the ground that it is hearsay.
Should the court grant the motion to strike out?
A.

No, the court should not grant the motion to strike out.
Under the Rules of Evidence, statements
made while a startling occurrence is taking place or
immediately prior or subsequent thereto, under the
stress of excitement caused by the occurrence with
respect to the circumstances thereof are excepted
from the hearsay rule.
Here the statement of the purser was made
while the startling occurrence was still fresh and
continued to be felt, the excitement not having died
down as yet, and it related to the circumstances
regarding the ouster incident. (Air France v.
Carrascoso, 18 SCRA 155).

Q.

While members of the Sigma Rho Fraternity
were having lunch at a canteen in U.P., masked
men suddenly attacked them with baseball bats.
As a result the Sigma Rhoans suffered injuries
and one of them later died. Shortly thereafter, a
police officer interviewed bystanders who told
him that they could not recognize the attackers
since they were masked. Is the testimonyof the
police officer admissible over objection that
it is hearsay?

A.

Yes. There is no doubt that a sudden attack on a
group peacefully eating lunch on a school campus
is a startling occurrence. Considering that the
statements of the bystanders were made immediately
after the startling occurrence, these are admissible
as part of the res gestae. (People v. Feliciano, 5
May 2014, Leanen, J.).

862

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q. Dencio barged into the house of Marcela, tied
her to a chair and robbed her of assorted pieces
of jewelry and money. Dencio then brought
Candida, Marcela's maid, to a bedroom where
he raped her. Marcela could hear Candida
crying and pleading: "Huwag! Maawa ka sa
akin!" After raping Candida, Dencio fled from
the house with the loot. Candida then untied
Marcelaand rushed to the police station about a
kilometer away and told Police Officer Roberto
Maawa that Dencio had barged into the house
of Marcela,tied the latter to a chair and robbed
her of her jewelry and money. Candida also
related to the police officer that despite her
pleas, Dencio had raped her. The policeman
noticed that Candida was hysterical and on the
verge of collapse. Dencio was charged with
robbery with rape. During the trial, Candidacan
no longer be located.
a) If the prosecution presents Police Officer
Roberto Maawa to testify on what Candida
had told him, would such testimony of the
policeman be hearsay? Explain.
xxx (05 Bar Q16a)
A.

The testimony of the policeman would be hearsay
but would be admissible under the res gestae
exception to the hearsay rule.
Under the Rules on Evidence, statements
made by a person while a startling occurrence is
taking place or immediately prior or subsequent
thereto with respect to the circumstances thereof,
may be given in evidence as part of the res gestae.

863

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Although the statement was made after
Candida had run for a kilometer, it was admissible
under the res gestae exception since it was made
while Candida was still under the influence of the
startling occurrence, she being hysterical and on
the verge of collapse. The Supreme Court has held
that a statement made 9 hours after the killing but
while the declarant was still under the influence of
the startling event was admissible as part of the res
gestae. (People v. Berame, 30 July 1976).
Q.

May a statement made 11 hours after the
startling incident be admissible as part of the
res gestae?

A

Yes, provided that the declarant was still under the
influence of the startling occurrence when he made
the declaration. (Zarate v. People, 3 July 2009).

Q.

Gerry is being tried for rape. The prosecuton's
evidence sought to establish that at about 9:00
P.M. of 20 January 1994, Gerry went to
complainant June's houseto invite her to watch
the festivities going on at the town plaza.June
accepted the invitation. Upon reaching the
public market, which was just a stone's throw
away from June's house,Gerry forcibly dragged
June towards the banana grove behind the
market where he was able to have carnal
knowledge with June for about an hour. June
did not immediately go home thereafter, and it
was only in the early morning of the following
day that she narratedher ordeal to her daughter
Liza. Liza testified in court as to what June
revealedto her.
1) Is the testimony of Liza hearsay?
864

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

2) Is it admissible in evidence against the
objection of the defense? (94 Bar Q17).
A.

1) The testimony of Liza is hearsay.
Under the law of evidence, hearsay is defined
as an out-of-court statement offered to prove the
truth of the matter asserted therein.
Here Liza was testifying on June's out-of-court
statement and it was offered to prove the truth of
the matter asserted therein, that is, that Gerry had
raped June.
2) No, the testimony of Liza is not admissible
against the objection of the defense that it
is hearsay.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
rule, the statement must be made while a startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior
or after it.
Here June's statement was made the day after
the rape and there is no indication that June was
still under the influence of the rape incident when
she narrated the same to Liza.

Q.

Accused XXX raped his daughter AAA on 8 and
15 April 2001. XXX was tried for rape and
during the trial AAA testified against his father.
However she died before she could be crossexamined by XXX.
a) Should the testimonyof AAA be expunged?
In an effort to salvage the case against
XXX, the prosecution presented as witnesses
EEE and Calug.
865

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

EEE,an aunt of AAA, being the sister of the
mother of the latter, testified that at noontime
on 16 April 2001,AAA arrived at her house. She
noticed that AAA was sad and crying. Upon her
inquiry, AAA told her that she was raped by her
father on 8 April and three times hours ago on
15 April 2001. During the few days of AAA's
stay at her house, she often saw AAA crying. A
few days after, AAA went to the house of Pedro
de los Santos to work as a house helper. Her
employer, Pedro de los Santos, helped her in
instituting these rape cases, and EEE and de
los Santos accompanied AAA to report the
incident to the police.
Calug testified that on 18 April 2001, AAA
reported for work for the first time as a
househelper in the house of Pedro de los
Santos. He noticed that AAA was sad and lonely,
and often saw her crying. She confided to him
her problems, and revealedto him that she was
raped by her own father on April 8 and 15 of that
year 2001. He noticed that AAA had told their
employer, Pedro de los Santos, of what had
befallen her. After eight months, she left the de
los Santos household, and he did not know
anymore of her whereabouts until she heard
from the radio broadcastthat AAA was dead.
b) May the court admit the testimonies of EEE
and Calug over objection that these relate
to hearsay?
A.
a) Yes. An accused is guaranteed by no less than
the Constitution the right to cross-examine a

866

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

witness. Section 14(2), Article Ill of the
Constitution provides that an accused shall
have the right to meet the witnesses face to
face, which is echoed in S1 (f) R115. The right of
an accused to cross-examine a witness is
essential to test the credibility and truthfulness
of the testimony offered and likewise provides
an opportunity for the accused to demonstrate
substantial inconsistencies that could create
reasonable doubt as to his guilt. In this regard,
the RTC was correct in excluding AAA's direct
testimony from the records notwithstanding the
incriminating contents thereof.
b) Yes as part of the res gestae and therefore
excepted from the hearsay rule. In the case at
bar, AAA went to, and arrived at the house of
her aunt EEE by noon on 16 April 2001 - about
12 hours after she was ravished by her father.
She left their house that day after she was
raped three times by her own father, and went
to her aunt's house located in the same
municipality. Upon arrival at her aunt's house,
AAA was sad and crying, and revealed to her
aunt that she was raped by her father. Although
her utterances may not have been made
immediately or simultaneous with the actual
rape, the said utterances were "so connected
with it as to make the act or declaration and the
main fact inseparable, or be generated by an
excited feeling which extends, without break or
let down, from the moment of the event they
illustrate." On this factual backdrop, it is clearly
evident that AAA made this revelation to her
aunt before she could make a deliberate design
or had the opportunity "to devise or contrive"

867

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

anything contrary to the real facts that occurred.
(People v. XXX, 22 August 2018, Caguioa, J.).
Q.

Jay Lourd was shot. His wife came to his aid
and he said to her, "Panggay, you see if Gilbert
is still here." Jay Lourd later died in hospital.
In the trial for murder against Gilbert, is his
wife's testimony as to what Jay Lourd said to
her admissible over a hearsayobjection?

A.

Yes as part of the res gestae. However in the
absence of corroborative or circumstantial evidence,
the statement was not proof that Gilbert shot Jay
Lourd. (People v. Floresta, 17 June 2019, PerlasBernabe, J.).

Q.

Alejo was stabbed in the abdomen. He
immediately called for help and a policeman
promptly approachedhim. He told the policeman
that he felt he would die from the serious wound
inflicted on him by Danilo who has a grudge
against him. He was brought to a hospital for
treatment where, on the same day, he was shot
and killed by someone whose identity could not
be established by an eye-witness. Eventually,
Danilo was charged in court for the death of
Alejo. The prosecution had to build its case on
circumstantialevidence. At the ensuing trial, the
policeman was presented to testify on the
declaration made to him by Alejo. The defense
objected. Meetingthe objection,the prosecution
argued for the admissibility of the evidenceas a
dying declaration (ante mortem statement)or as
part of the res gestae, either of which, when
deemed competent evidence as an exception to
the hearsayrule, would demonstrablybe relevant
to the ultimatefact in issue,the guilt of Danilofor
868

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

the death of Alejo. The defense countered by
arguing that no facts relevantto the stabbing can
be relevantto the shooting.
Is the contention of the prosecution with
respect to the relevancy and competency of
evidence correct? Discuss fully. (92 Bar Q2).
A.

The argument of the prosecution with respect to the
relevancy and competency of the evidence is
not correct.
The statement of Alejo is not admissible as a
dying declaration because it did not relate to the
cause and circumstances surrounding his fatal
shooting.
The statement would have been admissible as
part of the res gestae since it was made immediately
after a startling occurrence, i.e., his stabbing.
However it is not admissible for it would violate the
similar acts rule. (S35 R130). Evidence that Danilo
stabbed Alejo is not admissible to prove that Danilo
was the one who shot Alejo. The defense argument
that no facts relating to the stabbing can be relevant
to the shooting was in substance an objection based
on the similar acts rule.

Q.

Two hours after Lt. Yap of the 2"d Air Division,
PAF, at the Mactan Air Base in Lapulapu City,
was shot with a .45 caliber pistol, his Division
Commander, Brig. Gen. A, visited him at the
Cebu Doctor's Hospital in Cebu City where he
was immediately brought for treatment of the
gunshot wound. Lt. Yap told A that it was Jose
Comen who shot him. Forthwith, A, who is a
law graduate, took the initiative of taking down
in long hand the statement of Lt. Yap. The latter

869

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

narrated the events surrounding the incident
and categorically stated that it was Jose Comen
who shot him. Lt. Yap signed the statement in
the presence of A and the attending nurse. Ten
days later, Lt. Yap died as a consequenceof the
gunshot wound. An information for murder was
filed against Jose Comen.
At the trial, the above statement of Lt. Yap
marked as Exhibit X was presented and
identified by A who did not, however, testify
that Lt. Yap read it or that it was read to him
before he (Yap) signed it. A, nevertheless,
testified that, as above stated, Lt. Yap told him
that it was Jose Comen who shot him. The
defense objected to the testimony of A and to
the admission of Exh. X on the ground that they
are hearsay. The prosecution contended that
both are exceptions to the hearsay rule as they
are part of the res gestae.
(a) Is the prosecution correct?
(b) If the statement cannot be admitted as part
of the res gestae, may it be considered as a
dying declaration?
(c) If the statement of A as to the revelation of
Lt. Yap is not admissible for being hearsay,
may it be admitted as an independently
relevant statement? (91 Bar Q16).
A.

(a) No, the prosecution is not correct.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
rule, the statement must be made while the startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto. Here the statement was made

870

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

two hours after the shooting and there is no
showing that Lt. Yap was still under the influence
of the shooting incident at the time he made
the statement.
(b) No, the statement may not be considered as a
dying declaration. There was no showing that
Lt. Yap was under the consciousness of his
impending death at the time he made the
statement. The degree or severity of the gunshot
wound was not shown and it took 10 days after
the shooting for Lt. Yap to perish.
(c) No, it may not be admitted as an independently
relevant statement. The statement was being
offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted
therein, that is, that it was Jose Comen who
shot Lt. Yap. It had no relevance for the
prosecution other than to prove that Jose
Comen shot Lt. Yap. Hence it is hearsay and
inadmissible in evidence.
Q.

Blinded by extreme jealousy, Alberto shot his
wife, Betty, in the presence of his sister, Carla.
Carla brought Betty to the hospital. Outside the
operating room, Carla told Domingo, a male
nurse, that it was Alberto who shot Betty. Betty
died while undergoing emergency surgery. At
the trial of the parricide charges filed against
Alberto, the prosecutor sought to present
Domingo as witness, to testify on what Carla
told him. The defense counsel objected on the
ground that Domingo'stestimonyis inadmissible
for being hearsay. Rule on the objection with
reasons. (09 Bar Q13)

A.

The objection should be sustained.
871

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Under the Rules of Evidence, hearsay is an
out-of-court statement offered to prove the truth of
the matter asserted therein and which statement is
inadmissible in evidence.
Here Domingo's testimony related to the outof-court statement of Carla and which statement
was offered to prove that it was Alberto who shot
Betty. Hence Domingo's testimony is hearsay and
is inadmissible in evidence.
The statement is not admissible as part of the
res gestae.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
rule, the statement must be made while the startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto.
Here at the time Carla made the statement to
Domingo, Betty had already been brought to the
hospital and then to the operating room, thereby
indicating the lapse of an appreciable length of time
between the shooting and the making of the
statement. Nor was there a showing that Carla was
still under the influence of the startling occurrence
at the time she made the statement to Domingo.
Hence Carla's statement is not admissible as part
of the res gestae.
Nor will Carla's statement be admissible as a
dying declaration.
Under the Rules of Evidence, a dying
declaration must be made by the person who died.
Here the statement was made by Carla who
was not the one who died. Hence Carla's statement
is not admissible as a dying declaration.

872

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant corporation for
damages after his car collided at night with the
Defendant's dump truckwhich had been parked
askew along the roadside. Defendant argued
that the proximate cause of the collisionwas
the Plaintiff's speeding. Defendant presented
the testimony of a police officer who was at the
scene of the accident almost immediately after
it occurred. The police officer testified that the
people who had gathered at the scene of the
accident told him that Plaintiff's car was
"moving fast" and did not have its headlights
turned on. Plaintiff moved to strike out the
testimony on the ground of hearsay. How
should the courtrule on the motion?

A.

The court should deny the motion. The testimony of
the police officer is admissible as part of the res
gestae. Testimonial evidence under this exception
to the hearsay rule consists of excited utterances
made on the occasion of an occurrence or event
sufficiently startling in nature so as to render
inoperative the normal reflective thought processes
of the observer and hence made as a spontaneous
reaction to the occurrence or event, and not the
result of reflective thought.
An automobile speeding down a street and
suddenly smashing into a stationary object in the
dead of night is a sufficiently startling event as to
evoke spontaneous, rather than reflective, reactions
from observers who happened to be around at that
time. The police officer's testimony was therefore
admissible as part of the res gestae.
(Phoenix
Construction, Inc. v. Dionisio, 10 March 1987).

873

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Explain the verbal
hearsay rule.

acts

exception

to the

A.

Statements accompanying an accompanying an
equivocal act material to the issue and giving it a
legal significance may be received in evidence as
part of the res gestae. (S33 R130).

Q.

Give an example of a verbal act.

A.

B was seen handing P5,000 to F. B's act of handing
P5,000 to F is an equivocal act for it could be
indicative of a loan, donation, or payment of a preexisting debt. B later dies. B's estate sues F to
recover the P5,000. F contends that B donated the
money to him. The estate can present witness W
who will testify that he heard B say, "this is a loan,"
as he handed the P5,000 to F. B's statement gives
legal significance to B's act of handing the money
by characterizing it as a loan rather than a gift.

Family reputation
Q.

May reputation be introduced in evidence in order
to prove a matter subject of the reputation?

A.

Generally no. The reason is that reputation evidence
is hearsay evidence as the witness is not testifying
to a matter of his personal knowledge but rather as
to the reputation. The persons or people who are
the source of the reputation cannot be crossexamined by the adverse party.
The exceptions are in the case of family
reputation and common reputation.

874

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Explain family reputation or tradition regarding
pedigree as an exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

The reputation or tradition existing in a family
previous to the controversy, regarding the pedigree
of any one of its members, may be received in
evidence if the witness testifying thereon be also a
member of the family, either by consanguinity or
affinity, or adoption. (842 R 130).
Note that the witness must be a member of the
family whose reputation or tradition he is testifying
about and that the reputation or tradition must be
about the pedigree of any one of its members.

Q.

Give an example
family reputation.

of a statement

A.

Witness W can testify that in their family, the
reputation was that Maria was an adopted child of
his parents.

Q.

Witness W will testify that in their family, the
reputation was that their brother X was a child
genius. May this be offered in evidence over
objection that it is hearsay?

A.

No. The reputation cannot come in as family
reputation since it is not about the pedigree of X.
Nor can it come under common reputation since it
was only present in W's family.

Q.

Is preliminary and independent evidence of the
witness's family membership required?

A.

No. The witness can rely on his own testimony of
family membership.

875

regarding

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

In a filiation case, the petitioner presented a
family book where he is indicated as a member of
the family. The respondent objected on the
ground that the family book is hearsay since the
person who made the entry was not presented in
court and thus not subject to cross-examination.
Should the objection be sustained?

A.

No, the objection must be overruled. Entries in
family bibles or other family books or charts,
engravings on rings, family portraits and the like,
may be received in evidence without calling to
testify the one who made the entries or engravings.
(842 R130).

Common reputation
Q.

Is a statement regarding common reputation
admissible as a hearsay exception?

A.

Yes, provided that the common reputation:
1) Existed previous to the controversy or is ante
/item motam.
2) Is about boundaries of or customs affecting lands
in the community and reputation as to events of
general history important to the community, or
respecting marriage or moral character.
The broad phrase "facts of public or general
interest more than 30 years old" under the former
841 R 130 on common reputation was deleted and
replaced with the more particular "boundaries of or
customs affecting lands in the community and
reputation as to events of general history important
to the community."
This adopts the hearsay
exception under FRE 803(20).
876

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

The common reputation must be one that
is "existing previous to the controversy" or ante
153
/item mo tam.
Q.

Where should the reputation exist?

A.

S43 R130 speaks of common reputation existing in
the community with respect to reputation to
boundaries or customs affecting lands and with
respect to events of general history. As to
reputation regarding marriage and moral character,
it is submitted that the reputation may be not only
among the community but also among his
associates. (FRE 803[19][20]). The reason is that in
modern urban communities, individuals are more
anonymous. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 139 [2004 ed.]).

Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage
against her husband Panibugho and his
paramour Kalunya. May the court allow or give
weight to the following evidence presented by
the prosecutionover the vigorous objections of
the defense? Explain.

xxx
(d) Testimony of Kuya, Panibugho's brother,
who testified that no man in their family for
at least three generations has been content
with only one woman and that this
reputation and tradition is established in
their community. (86 Bar Q1 Od).
153Under
FRE 803(20) the ante /item motam requirement does not apply to
general historical events the reasoning being that the historical character of the
subject matter dispenses with any need that the reputation antedate the
controversy with respect to which it is offered. This approach was not adopted in
the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

877

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

(d) The testimony of the brother is not admissible.
The testimony of Kuya will not qualify under the
family reputation exception since the reputation is
one existing in the community rather than the family.
Furthermore, philandering is not embraced within the
term "pedigree." While the testimony may come in
under the common reputation exception, it is
objectionable on the ground that the prosecution
cannot introduce evidence of the accused's bad
moral character except in rebuttal. (S54[a][2] R130).

Commercialpublication
Q.

What is the commercial publicationexception to
the hearsay rule?

A.

A commercial publication is a list, register, periodical,
or other published compilation containing statements
of matters of interest to persons engaged in an
occupation, published for use by persons engaged in
that occupation, and is generally used and relied
upon by them. (S47 R130).

Q.

What are the requirements of the commercial
list hearsay exception?

A.

The requirements are:
1) There is a a list, register, periodical, or other
published compilation.
2) Such published compilation contains statements
of matters of interest to persons engaged in an
occupation.
3) The compilation is published for use by persons
engaged in that occupation.

878

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

4) The compilation is generally used and relied
upon by the persons engaged in that
occupation. (PIO PR)
Q.

Give examples of commercial publications as
exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

Examples of such commercial publications are
stock market reports, foreign exchange tables,
mortality tables, actuarial and annuity tables, which
are published for use and relied upon by the
persons engaged in the enterprise or business.
Compilations of American cases or laws contained
in books published by West Publishing Company
are also examples. Hence they may be used to
prove a foreign case or foreign law.
It is presumed that a printed or published book,
purporting to contain reports of cases adjudged in
tribunals of a foreign country where the book is
published, contains correct reports of such cases.
(S3[hh] R 131 ).

Q.

A PNOCship collided with private respondent's
fishing ship resulting in the latter ship sinking.
Private Respondent sued PNOC for recovery of
the value of the ship and damages. In order to
prove damages, private respondent offered in
evidencequotation letters from a ship builder and
equipment dealers quoting the price of a fishing
ship, fishing gear and equipment similar to those
lost by Private Respondent. The persons who
wrote the quotation letters were however not
presentedby Private Respondentin court.
a) Are the price quotations hearsay?

879

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) If so, would they fall under the commercial
lists exception?
A.
a) Yes the price quotations are hearsay. The
letters were out-of-court statements offered to
prove the truth of the valuations made therein.
b) No, they would not fall under the commercial
lists exception since the letters are not in the
nature of lists, registers, periodicals, or other
published compilations. (PNOC Shipping Corp.
v. CA, 297 SCRA 402).
Q.

In a compulsory arbitration case between
Meralco and its union, may the Secretary of
Labor take into account a newspaper report
citing an All Asia Capital financial analyst's
estimate of Meralco's 1996 net operating
income at P5.8 billion and upon which the union
relied upon in order to support its position on
the wage issue?

A.

No. Under S47 R130, statement of matters
contained in a periodical may be admitted only "if
that compilation is published for use by persons
engaged in that occupation and is generally used
and relied upon by them therein." The cited report is
a mere newspaper account and not even a
commercial list. At most, it is but an analysis or
opinion which carries no persuasive weight as no
sufficient figures to support it were presented.
Neither did anybody testify to its accuracy. It cannot
be said that businessmen generally rely on news
items such as this in their occupation. Besides, no

880

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

evidence was presented that the publication was
regularly prepared by a person in touch with the
market and that it is generally regarded as
trustworthy and reliable. Absent extrinsic proof of
their accuracy, these reports are not admissible.
(Manila Electric Co. v. Quisumbing, 326 SCRA 172).
Q.

Are the stock market quotations or reports in
newspapers admissible in evidence over a
hearsayobjection?

A.

Yes. Such stock market quotations or reports are
excepted under the commercial lists exception.
(See Notes of the Advisory Committee to FRE
803[17]). A newspaper's stock-price listings are
published for use by persons engaged in stock
market trading or investing and are generally relied
upon by them. The pronouncement to the contrary
in Manila Electric Co. v. Quisumbing, 326 SCRA
154
172,
was merely an obiter dictum and is not in
accord with the majority position of American courts
and legal authorities.

Q.

Are classified advertisements in the buy-andsell section of a newspaper admissible  over
objection that these are hearsay?

A.

No. Price offers in classified ads are clearly
hearsay. They cannot be considered as commercial
lists since they are essentially separate and distinct
offers to buy or sell and not a published compilation
containing commercial information.

154The
Quisumbing case involved a newspaper report of a financial
analyst's estimate of Meralco's 1996 net operating income. The report was
clearly hearsay.

881

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Official records
Q.

What is the official records exception to the
hearsay rule?

A.

Entries in official records made in the performance of
his duty by a public officer of the Philippines, or by a
person in the performance of a duty specially
enjoined by law are excepted from the hearsay rule.
(846 R130). Not only are the official entries excepted
from the hearsay rule, they are also considered as
prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated. (Id.).

Q.

What are the requirements of the official entries
exception?

A.

The requirements are: (K POP)
1) The entries must have been made in official
records.
2) The entry must have been made by a public
officer of the Philippines in the performance of
his duty or by a person in the performance of a
duty specially enjoined by law.
3) The entrant must have personal knowledge of
the facts stated by him or such facts were
acquired by him from reports made by persons
under a legal duty to submit the same.

Q.

X was charged with robbery. On the strength of
a warrant of arrest issued by the court, X was
arrested by police operatives. They seized from
his person a handgun. A charge for illegal
possession of firearms was also filed against
him. In a press conference called by the police,
X admitted that he had robbed the victim of
jewelry valued at P500,000.00.

882

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

The robbery and illegal possession of firearm
cases were tried jointly. The prosecution presented
in evidence a newspaper clipping of the report by
the reporter who was present during the press
conference stating that X admitted the robbery. It
likewise presented a certification of the PNP
Firearms and Explosives Office attesting that the
accused had no license to carry any firearm. The
certifying officer, however, was not presented as a
witness. Both pieces of evidence were objected to
by the defense.
(a) xxx

(b)

Is the certification of the PNP Firearm and
Explosives Office without the certifying
officer testifying on it admissible in evidence
against X? (03 Bar Q18).

A.
(b) Yes the PNP certification
evidence against X.

is admissible

in

Under the Rules on Evidence, excepted from
the hearsay rule are entries in official records made
in the performance of his duty by a public officer.
There is no requirement that the entrant is dead or
unavailable to testify. (846 R130).
The PNP certification is an official record which
is excepted from the hearsay rule and thus
admissible in evidence even without accounting for
the non-presentation of the entrant.
Q.

Prosecution of Accused for Illegal Recruitment.
The Prosecution presented a POEA Certification,
issued by the Director of its Licensing Branch,
883

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

that the Accused is neither licensed nor
authorized by the POEA to recruit workers for
overseas employment. The Accused objects to
the offer on the ground that the Director was
not presented in court to testify thereon and
thus the certification is hearsay. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

No. One of the exceptions to the hearsay rule are
entries in official records made in the performance
of duty by a public officer. In other words, official
entries are admissible in evidence regardless of
whether the officer or person who made them was
presented and testified in court, since these entries
are considered prima facie evidence of the facts
stated therein. (People v. Ochoa, 31 August 2011,
Leonardo-De Castro, J.).155

Q.

Pedrofiled a petition for relief from the judgment
of the RTC in Pam's favor. Pedro contends that
the judgment was null and void because the
sheriff did not exert diligent efforts to effect
personal service before resorting to substituted
service. Pam presentedin evidencethe sheriff's
return wherein it was stated that the sheriff
exerteddiligent efforts to effect personalservice
before resorting to substituted service. Pam
however did not present the sheriff who made
the return nor did she explain why she failed to
presentthe sheriff. Pedro objectedto the offer of
the sheriff's return on the ground that it was
hearsay. Pedro argued that Pam should have

155The
SC noted that a witness had identified the signature of the certifying
officer. It is opined that even if the certifying officer's signature was not identified,
the certification would still be admissible as it is a public document under S19(a)
R 132 which does not need to be authenticated.

884

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

presented the sheriff so that he could have been
cross-examined by Pedro. How should the court
rule on the objection?
A.

The court should overrule the objection.
Under the Rules on Evidence, entries in official
records made by a public officer in the performance
of a duty are excepted from the hearsay rule and
there is no requirement that the entrant be dead or
unable to testify.
Here the sheriff is a public officer and he made
the entries in the return in the per.formance of duty.
Hence the return is excepted from the hearsay rule
even if the sheriff was not presented in court.

Q.

If the entry is made by a public officer of a
foreign country in the performance of his duty,
is the same excepted from the hearsay rule?

A.

While the text of 846 R130 would appear to indicate
that such entry is not excepted from the hearsay
rule, it is submitted that it is so excepted taking into
account 819(a) and 823 of R130. 819(a) classifies
as public documents the written official acts or
records of the acts of public officers, whether of the
Philippines or of a foreign country. 823, captioned
"[p]ublic documents as evidence," provides that
documents consisting of entries in public records
made in the performance of a duty by a public
officer are prima facie evidence of the facts therein
stated. FRE 803(8) also treats public records as an
exception to the hearsay rule.

Q.

Is a return of service of summons executed by
a foreign sheriff admissible to prove the fact of

885

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

service even without presenting in court the
foreign sheriff?
A.

It is submitted that the return of service is
admissible to prove the fact of service even without
presenting the foreign sheriff.
Although 844 R 130 refers to "[e]ntries in official
records made in the performance of his duty by a
public officer of the Philippines" (italics supplied), this
provision should be read in conjunction with S19(a)
R132 and 823 R132. S19(a) R132 classifies as
public documents, the written official acts of public
officers, whether of the Philippines . or of a foreign
country. Under 823 R132, "[d]ocuments consisting
of entries in public records made in the performance
of a duty by a public officer are prima facie evidence
of the facts therein stated."
Hence the return of service may be presented
as prima facie evidence of the fact of service even
without presenting the foreign sheriff. The
requirements of proof of official record under 824
R132 must of course be followed.

Q.

Give examples of private persons specially
enjoined by law to make official entries.

A.

(1) Log book entries required to be kept by a ship
captain regarding the incidents of navigation (Article
612, Code of Commerce; Haverton Shipping Ltd. v.
NLRC, 15 April 1985); (2) Stamp of dishonor and its
reason required from the drawee of a check under
B.P. Big. 22; and (3) Parties to a marriage
ceremony and the solemnizing officer are required
to sign and attest the marriage certificate and the
solemnizing officer is required to keep a copy. (Art.
23, Family Code).

886

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

W, claiming to be H's wife, filed a motion to
intervene in the settlement of H's estate. The
administrator resists the motion on his allegation
that H was never married. May the administrator
introduce, over a hearsay objection, H's income
tax return for the past five years wherein H
stated that he was single?

A.

Yes. H's income tax return is excepted from hearsay
rule as an official record, having been made by a
person specially enjoined by law to do so.

Q.

Is a certified true copy of the Monthly Report
dated January 1985of then Judge Rosalia A. De
Leon, attesting to the fact that petitioner was
convicted of the crime of Robbery with
Homicide on 11 January 1985, an exception to
the hearsay rule?

A.

Yes. Such Monthly Report constitutes an entry in
official records under 846 R 130, which is prima facie
evidence of facts therein stated. (Feria v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 122954, 15 February 2000).

Q.

Fire gutted a Caltex gasoline station. The flames
leapt over Caltex' fence and engulfed several
neighboring homes. After the fire, a police
investigatorwent to the premises.He wrote down
in his report that many people passed by the
gasolinestation. He also wrote that he interviewed
a bystanderwho told him that he (the bystander)
saw a person throw a lighted cigarette near the
gasolinetanks and that this started the fire. Is the
police investigation report admissible to prove
the facts stated therein without presenting the
police investigator?

887

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

As to the fact that many people passed by the
gasoline station, the police investigation report is
admissible to prove this since the police
investigation report is an official entry.
However as to the fact that the fire was started
by someone throwing a lighted cigarette, the police
investigation report was hearsay. This is because
the police investigator did not personally perceive
this fact. (Africa v. Caltex, 16 SCRA 448).

Q.

Respondent Corporation filed a complaint for
damages for P200,000against Petitioner before
the MTC. Since the case was governed by the
Rule on Summary Procedure, the Respondent
submitted its affidavit and a Traffic Accident
Investigation Report (TAIR) prepared by P02
Tomas in which P02 Tomas stated that a
certain Simbahon informed him that it was
Petitioner's vehicle which rammedfrom behind
Respondent's vehicle. Neither the affidavit of
Tomas nor of Simbahon were presented in
evidence. The MTC,RTC,and the CA stated that
the TAIR was properly considered in finding the
Petitioner liable to the Respondentstating that
as an official record, it is an exception to the
hearsay rule. Werethe lower courts correct?

A.

No. The TAIR is hearsay. It does not qualify as an
official record exception to the hearsay rule since
P02 Tomas did not have personal knowledge of
the cause of the accident. In fact, even if the
affidavit of P02 Tomas were presented in evidence, it
would still be insufficient to establish that it was the
Petitioner who caused the accident. For that

888

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

purpose, the affidavit of Simbahon was necessary.
(DST Movers Corp. v. People's General Insurance
Corp., 13 January 2016, Leanen, J.).
Q.

The BIR issued a warrant of distraint and levy
against the petitioner for deficiency income tax.
The Petitionerraisedthe defenseof prescription,
arguing that the BIR's right to assess had
prescribed. The BIR contended that it had sent
a formal assessment notice to the Petitioner.
As evidence,the BIR offered in evidence before
the CTA a BIR record book containing the
taxpayer's name,the tax assessed,the registry
receipt number, and the date of mailing, which
was offered to prove that the Petitioner had
received the assessment notice. The records
custodian also testified that she was the one
who made the entries In the record book.
Howevershe did not attest that she was the one
who personally prepared and mailed the
assessment notice nor did she attest that the
information in the entries were supplied by
persons having a specific legal duty to do so.
Were the entries in the BIR record book an
exception to the hearsayrule?

A.

No. In Africa v. Caltex, 16 SCRA 448, it has been
held that under 846 R130 the entrant must have
personal knowledge of the facts stated by him or
such facts were acquired by him from reports made
by persons under a legal duty to submit the same.
Here the BIR records custodian who made the
entries thereon did not have personal knowledge
thereof since she did not attest that she was the
one who personally prepared and mailed the
assessment notice nor did she attest that the
information in the entries were supplied by persons
889

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

having a specific legal duty to do so. It was not
stated in the TSN how and from whom she
obtained the pertinent information. Hence S44
R130 is inapplicable. (Barcelon, Roxas Securities
Inc. v. Comm. of Internal Revenue, G.R. 157064, 7
August 2006).
Learned treatises
Q.

Give the requisites of the learned treatise
exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

The requisites of the learned treatise exception are:
(PLR)
1) There is a published treatise, periodical or pamphlet.
2) It is on the subject of law, art, science. or
history. (LASH)
3) The writer of the statement in the treatise,
periodical, or pamphlet is recognized in his
profession or calling as expert in the subject.
Such recognition may be proved by an expert
witness or taken judicial notice of by the court.
(S48 R130).

Q.

Is an article on the web by an expert covered by
this exception?

A.

It is submitted that it is not so covered. "Published"
here refers to one done by publishing houses and
intended for sale or distribution to the public. Such
publication, with the safeguards of editorial and
peer review, assures quality and authoritativeness
of the treatise, periodical, or pamphlet and
guards against inferior or mediocre material. Such
safeguards are not present in the internet where
890

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

almost anybody can post an article and represent
himself to be an expert.
Residual exception
Q.

What is the residual exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

Aside from specific exceptions to the hearsay rule, the
residual exception allows for a broad exemption
for statements "having equivalent circumstantial
guarantees of trustworthiness." The residual exception
provided for a compromise between those advocating
the abandonment of the hearsay rule to those
pushing for its retention. The residual exception was
eventually incorporated to the FRE as R807. The
residual exception was adopted in the 2020 Rules on
Evidence as S5 R130 which reads as follows:
"Sec. 50. Residual exception. - A statement not
specifically covered by any of the foregoing exceptions,
having
equivalent circumstantial guarantees
of
trustworthiness, is admissible if the court determines that
(a) the statement is offered as evidence of a material fact;
(b) the statement is more probative on the point for which
it is offered than any other evidence which the proponent
can procure through reasonable efforts; and (c) the
general purposes of these rules and the interests of
justice will be best served by admission of the statement
into evidence. However, a statement may not be admitted
under this exception unless the proponent makes known
to the adverse party, sufficiently in advance of the
hearing, or by the pre-trial stage in the case of a trial of
the main case, to provide the adverse party with a fair
opportunity to prepare to meet it, the proponent's intention
to offer the statement and the particulars of it, including
the name and address of the declarant."156

156The
adoption of the residual exception is a laudable move which serves to
temper the hearsay rule by giving leeway to the trial judge to admit trustworthy

891

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

The clock tower of the Dallas County courthouse
had collapsed five days after a thunderstormin
1957. Dallas County requested for its insurer,
Commercial Union Assurance Company, to
cover the damage resulting from the collapse of
the Dallas County Courthouse clock tower.
Several witnesses testified that lightning struck
the building during the storm. The county used
the existence of charred timbers in the
wreckage to corroborate the eyewitness accounts.
The insurance company, however, denied that
lightning charred the timbers, contending
instead that the damage occurred during a
previous fire. The company offered, and the trial
court admitted, an unsigned newspaper article
dated 9 June 1901 which reported a blaze in the
courthouse. The article did not come within an
established exception to the hearsay rule. Was
it proper for the trial court to admit the
newspaper article?

A.

Yes, under the residual exception to the hearsay
rule. The court admitted the report solely on
grounds of necessity and trustworthiness. It
recognized that the article was needed because the
memory of any witness to the fire would not have
been as reliable as the newspaper account. The
court reasoned that the article was the only
evidence available to prove the insurer's claim and

hearsay. It is to be noted however that FRE 807 was amended in 1 December 2019
in order to address problems encountered in practice. The 2019 amendment did
away with the equivalence standard by replacing "equivalent circumstantial
guarantees of trustworthiness" with "sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness." Also
while the prior rule required notice before trial of one's intent to introduce hear~y
evidence under the residual exception, the new rule also permits giving
notice during trial, if the court determines that the lack of earlier notice should be
excused for good cause. It is respectfully suggested that the 2020 Rules of
Evidence adopt the 1 December 2019 amendment of FRE 807.

892

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

it came from an inherently reliable source. The
court concluded that the article was trustworthy
since it was inconceivable that a small town
reporter would fabricate the story. (Dallas County v.
Commercial Union Assurance Co., 286 F.2d
388 [5th Cir. 1961])
Q.

Describe the hearsay exception in child abuse
cases.

A.

A child's statement describing an act or attempted
act of child abuse is excepted from the hearsay
rule. The proponent shall make known to the
adverse party the intention to offer such statement
and its particulars to provide him a fair opportunity
to object.
If the child is available, the court, upon motion
of the adverse party, shall require the child to be
present at the hearsay statement for crossexamination by the adverse party.
If the child is unavailable, the proponent must
prove such unavailability. The statement shall be
admitted only if corroborated by other admissible
evidence. "Unavailable" includes cases where the
child is suffering from physical infirmity, lack of
memory, mental illness, or will be exposed to
severe psychological injury. (Section 28, RECW).
A child witness is any person who at the time
of giving testimony is below 18 years. In child
abuse cases, a child includes one over 18 years
but is found by the court as unable to fully take care
of himself or protect himself from abuse, neglect,
cruelty, exploitation, or discrimination because of a
physical or mental disability or condition. (Section
4[a], RECW).

893

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Multiple (double) hearsay
Q.

What is double or multiple hearsay?

A.

Double or multiple hearsay occurs when a hearsay
declaration is embedded in another with the result
that there are two or more levels of hearsay. This
frequently happens where a party seeks to
introduce a written report by a declarant (first level)
of another declarant's out-of-court statement (second
level). Under FRE 805, hearsay included within
hearsay is not excluded under the hearsay rule if
each level of hearsay conforms with an exception
to the hearsay rule.

Q.

02 was mortally injured. Conscious of his
impending death, 02 was interviewed by a
police officer01. 02 told 01 that X stabbed him
several times. 01 wrote what 02 said in his
police investigation report. In the prosecutionof
X for murder, may the prosecution present the
police investigation to prove that X stabbed 02
withoutpresenting 01?

A.

Yes. Each level of hearsay conforms with an
exception to the hearsay rule. The first level is
justified by the official records exception while the
second level is justified by the dying declarations
exception. If the one who wrote down what 02 said
was a private person who later became unavailable
to testify, the writing would be inadmissible as the
first level is not supported by a hearsay exception.

Q.

02 was found mortally injured by a security
officer in a lobby of a hotel. Conscious of his
impending death, 02 was interviewed by the
hotel's security officer 01 and 02 told 01 that X
894

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

stabbed him several times. 01 wrote what 02
said in his log book. 01 later died in an accident.
In the prosecution of X for murder, may the
prosecution present the log book to prove that
X stabbed 02?
A.

Yes. Each level of hearsay conforms with an
exception to the hearsay rule. The first level is
justified by the business entries exception while the
second level is justified by the dying declarations
exception.

Q.

Pedro was run down and injured by a Ferrari
sports car that did not stop after the accident.
The Fiscal believes that Jose was the one
driving the hit-and-run car and is preparing to
prosecute him. Pedro tells the Fiscal that his
(Pedro's) cousin, Atty. Cruz had given him
(Pedro)the following information:
a) that Jose, accompaniedby his socialite wife,
consulted him (Atty. Cruz) at his home an
hour after the accident;
b) that Jose told Atty. Cruz that "I ran into
someonewho was seriously injured with my
sports car";
c) that Jose's wife had said, "We should have
stopped as soon as we hit him";
d) that Atty. Cruz advised Jose, "In any event,
keep your car in the garageuntil we can find
out all the facts".
The Fiscal seeks to use the foregoing
evidence.May he do so? Discuss.(78 Bar Q9b).

895

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The Fiscal may not use the foregoing evidence over
the proper objection of Jose.
The facts indicate two levels of hearsay or outof-court statements, that is, the statements of Atty.
Cruz and the statements of Jose and his wife. In
order to determine whether the testimony of Pedro
is admissible, we have to determine the admissibility
of each level of hearsay/out-of-court statement.
While the statements of Jose are excluded from the
hearsay rule on the ground that they are partyadmissions, the statements of Atty. Cruz are not
justified by any hearsay exception or exclusion.
Hence the testimony of Pedro would be
objected to on the ground that it is hearsay. Atty.
Cruz himself may not be presented as a witness in
court over the objection that his testimony would
violate the attorney-client privilege.157
Nor may Jose's socialite wife be presented as
a witness over an objection invoking the marital
disqualification rule.

Q.

Romeo is sued for damages for injuries
suffered by the plaintiff in a vehicular accident.
Julieta, a witness in court, testifies that Romeo
told her (Julieta) that he (Romeo) heard Antonio,
a witness to the accident, give an excited
account of the accident immediately after its
occurrence. Is Julieta's testimony admissible
against Romeo over proper and timely objection?
(02 Bar Q12)
157The

UP Law Center Committee recommends that Jose's statement may
be admissible as part of the res gestae exception to the hearsay rule. This
answer overlooks that there is another level of hearsay, the statement of Atty.
Cruz, which is not covered by any hearsay exception or exclusion.

896

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

A.

Yes, Julieta's testimony is admissible even over the
relevant objection that it is testimony on hearsay.
An analysis of the problem reveals that there
are two out-of-court statements, that of Romeo and
that of Antonio. Romeo's statement is not covered
by the hearsay rule since it is an admission, Romeo
being the defendant. Antonio's statement is excepted
from the hearsay rule since it is an excited utterance.
Since each level of the out-of-court declaration is
justified by a hearsay exception or exclusion, Julieta's
testimony is admissible against Romeo.158

Lack ofpersonal knowledge distinguished from hearsay
Q.

Distinguish lack of personal knowledge from
hearsay.

A.

Lack of personal knowledge is when a witness is
testifying on facts which he does not know of his
personal knowledge or which are not derived from
his own perception. (See 822 R130). It is also
known as "lack of firsthand knowledge." It is
distinguished from hearsay in that the witness is not
reporting or introducing an out-of-court statement.

To illustrate: Prosecution presents W who
testifies that the accused shot the victim. The
record shows that W was in the U.S. at the time of
the shooting, which happened in Davao City.
Defense can object on the ground of lack of
personal knowledge, not hearsay. It is not hearsay
since W is not reporting or introducing an out-ofcourt statement.
1sa-rhe
suggested answer of the UP Law Center, which states that Julieta's
testimony is on hearsay, overlooks the fact that Romeo is the defendant himself
and thus his statement is excluded from the hearsay rule since it is a partyadmission.

897

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

If on the other hand, W testifies that David told
him that the accused shot the victim, the proper
objection is not lack of personal knowledge but
hearsay. (RICHARD LEMPERT & STEPHEN
SAL TZBURG, A MODERN APPROACH TO
EVIDENCE 369 [2d ed., 1982; 3d reprint, 1988]).
Opinion Rule
Q.

Is the opinionof a witness admissible in evidence?

A.

The opinion of a witness is not admissible in
evidence subject to certain exceptions.

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that the opinion
of a witnessis not admissible in evidence.

A.

The exceptions are: (1) expert opinion, and (2) lay
opinion on handwriting, identity, and sanity, and (3)
short-hand opinions. (SHE)

Q.

What is expert opinion?

A.

The opinion of a witness on a matter requiring
special knowledge, skill, experience or training
or education (special TEKES) which he is shown
to possess. The expert opinion may be received
in evidence.

Q.

Is it necessary that the expert witnesshave formal
trainingor instructionon his field of expertise?

A.

No, what is important is that he has special
knowledge, skill, experience or training.

Q.

What step should be taken before an expert
witness is allowed to testify?

A.

Unlike an ordinary witness, the expert witness
should be qualified before he is allowed to testify.

898

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Qualification is made by showing that the witness
possesses special knowledge, skill, experience or
training. The lack of qualification should be timely
raised by the adverse party before the witness is
presented to testify; otherwise the objection is
deemed waived.
Q. May an expert witness testify based on
hypotheticalor assumed facts?
A.

Yes. Unlike the ordinary witness, the expert witness
may testify based on hypothetical or assumed facts.
Thus a clinical psychologist can testify regarding
the psychological capacity of a person even if she
was not able to personally interview the witness.

Q. The petitioner filed a petition for declaration of
nullity of marriage based allegedly on the
psychological incapacity of the respondent, but
the psychologistwas not able to personally
examine the respondent and the psychological
report was based only on the narration of
petitioner. Should the annulment be granted?
(12 Civil Bar Essay-Type Q2b).
A.

No. The psychologist was not able to personally
examine the respondent and the psychological
report was based only on the narration of the
petitioner whose bias in favor of her cause cannot
be doubted. Hence the psychologist's report and
testimony were hearsay since she had no personal
knowledge of the alleged facts he was testifying on.
(Paz v. Paz, 18 February 2010).159
159However,

the psychologist's testimony and report were held to be not
hearsay if they were based not solely on the psychologist's interview of the
petitioner but of other persons, such as the respondent's own son, siblings, and his
sister-in-law (petitioner's sister). (Camacho-Reyes v. Reyes, 18 August 2010).

899

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Plaintiff Dr. dela Liana, a surgeon, sued
Defendantfor damagesarising from the incident
wherein Defendant's driver negligently bumped
Plaintiff's car. Plaintiff claimed that she suffered
a whiplash injury arising from the collision
which led to her being incapacitatedto practice
medicine. At the trial, Dr. dela Liana presented
herself as an ordinary witness. Dr. dela Liana
testified that she lost the mobility of her arm
becauseof the vehicular accident. DoesDr. dela
Liana's opinion have probativevalue?

A.

No. Despite the fact that Dr. dela Liana is a physician
and even assuming that she is an expert in
neurology, we cannot give weight to her opinion that
the driver's reckless driving caused her whiplash
injury without violating the rules on evidence. The
reason was that she was not presented as an expert
witness. As an ordinary witness, she was not
competent to testify on the nature, and the cause and
effects of whiplash injury. (Dela Liana v. Biong, 4
December 2013, Brion, J.)

Q.

Give the rule regarding the admissibility of a
report by a government medical, chemical, or
laboratory expert.

A.

A certified copy of the report of a government
medical, chemical, or laboratory expert (mcle)
relating to a criminal case shall be admissible as
prima facie evidence of the truth of its contents.
The personal appearance in court of a witness who
prepared the report shall be unnecessary unless
demanded by the accused for the purpose of crossexamination. (Sec. 13, AM. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1
May 2014 ). It appears that this provision which is

900

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

found in A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC applies only to
criminal cases involving detained accused.
Q.

When is the opinion of an ordinary witness
admissible in evidence?

A.

The opinion of a witness for which proper basis is
given, may be received in evidence regarding: (HIS)
(a) The identity of a person about whom he has
adequate knowledge.
(b) A handwriting with which he has sufficient
familiarity.
(c) The mental sanity of a person with whom he is
sufficiently acquainted.

The witness may also testify on his
impressions of the condition, appearance, behavior,
or emotion of a person (CABE). This is also known
as short-hand opinions or impressions. (S53 R130).
Witnesses can also give opinions or estimates
regarding physical dimensions (e.g., length, height,
weight), speed, and lighting conditions.

Q.

Dencio barged into the house of Marcela, tied
her to a chair and robbed her of assorted pieces
of jewelry and money. Dencio then brought
Candida, Marcela's maid, to a bedroom where
he raped her. Marcela could hear Candida
crying and pleading: "Huwagl Maawa ka sa
akin/" After raping Candida, Dencio fled from
the house with the loot. Candida then untied
Marcelaand rushed to the police station about a
kilometer away and told Police Officer Roberto
Maawa that Dencio had barged into the house
of Marcela,tied the latter to a chair and robbed
901

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

her of her jewelry and money. Candida also
related to the police officer that despite her
pleas, Dencio had raped her. The policeman
noticed that Candidawas hysterical and on the
verge of collapse. Dencio was charged with
robbery with rape. During the trial, Candidacan
no longer be located.
a) xxx
b) If the police officer will testify that he noticed
Candida to be hysterical and on the verge of
collapse,would such testimonybe considered
as opinion, hence, inadmissible? Explain.
(05 Bar Q16b).
A.
b) Yes, the police officer's testimony that he
noticed Candida to be hysterical and on the
verge of collapse is opinion but admissible as
an exception to the opinion rule.
Under the Rules of Evidence, a witness'
impressions of the condition, emotion, appearance,
and behavior of a person is an exception to the
opinion rule and thus admissible in evidence.
Here the police officer's testimony that
Candida is hysterical and on the verge of collapse
is his impression of her condition, emotion,
appearance, and behavior.
Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendantcorporationfor damages
after his car collided at night with the
Defendant'sdump truck which had been parked
askew along the roadside. Defendant argued
that the proximate cause of the collision was
the Plaintiff's speeding.Defendantpresentedthe
902

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

testimony of a police officer who was at the
scene of the accident almost immediately after
it occurred. The police officer testified that the
people who had gathered at the scene of the
accident told him that Plaintiff's car was
"moving fast." Plaintiff moved to strike out the
testimony on the ground that it related to
inadmissible opinion. How should the court rule
on the motion?
A.

The court should deny the motion. It is well-settled
in the Law on Evidence that a witness's opinion or
estimate of speed or velocity is admissible in
evidence. Clearly, substantial weight should have
been ascribed to such testimony, even though it did
not, as it could not, have purported to describe
quantitatively the precise velocity at which Plaintiff
was travelling just before impact with the dump
truck. (See Phoenix Construction, Inc. v. Dionisio,
10 March 1987).

Character Evidence
Q.

Distinguish between character and reputation.

A.

Character is what you are, reputation is what the
community knows you are. Reputation is used to
prove character. Note that family reputation and
common reputation are excepted from the hearsay
rule. (S42 & 43 R130).

Q.

Is character evidence admissible?

A.

The general rule is that character evidence is not
admissible. The reason is that it is irrelevant. A
case should be decided based on the facts and the
law, not on the character of the parties. The court
903

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

should try the case, not the man. (Pp v Lee, 29 May
2002). The S54 R130 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence
puts it in a more precise formulation: "Evidence of a
person's character or a trait of character is not
admissible for the purpose of proving action
in conformity therewith on a particular occasion."
This means that character cannot be used as
circumstantial evidence.
Q.

What are the uses of character evidence?

A.

The uses of character evidence are as follows: (GRID)
1) AS CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE, that is, that
a person acted in conformity with his character.
(S54 R130).
2) AS DIRECT EVIDENCE of character, where
character itself is the fact in issue.
3) TO IMPEACH the adverse party's witness (S11
R132).
4) TO REHABILITATE a witness whose character
has been impeached. (S54[c] R130).

Q.

Give the rule regarding character evidence in
civil cases:

A.

In civil cases, evidence of moral character of a party
is admissible only when pertinent to the issue of
character involved in a case. (S54[b] R130).
The fact in issue involved must be character
itself. Hence character cannot be used as
circumstantial evidence in a civil case.

904

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Q.

Give the civil cases
character is involved.

where

the

issue

of

A.

The following are the civil cases where the issue of
character is involved: (N LSC)
1) In civil actions for libel or slander, where the
character of the aggrieved person is a fact
in issue that may be proved by both plaintiff
and defendant;
2) In civil actions for seduction, where the woman
seduced must be of good reputation, (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO 668 [91h rev. ed.];
ANTONIO R. BAUSTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE
137 [2007 ed.]);
3) In cases involving negligent hiring; and
4) In child custody cases, where the character of
the parents or guardians is a fact-in-issue.

Q.

Owner sued contractor for damages for using
substandard materials despite their agreement to
use high-quality materials. May contractor present
a witness to testify on his honest reputation?

A.

No. The contractor's character is not a fact in issue
in the suit for damages. Here character evidence is
being used merely as circumstantial evidence that
contractor would not have deceived owner as he is
of honest character but it did not go directly to the
issue of whether the contractor violated the terms of
the agreement.

Q.

Action for damages against bus company by
plaintiff who was injured by the recklessness of
the bus driver. The plaintiff seeks to introduce
evidence that the driver had a reputation for

905

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

being a reckless driver. May the court admit the
evidence over objection that it is irrelevant
character evidence?

A.

Yes. This is a case of negligent hiring. The evidence
was competent upon the question of the bus
company's vicarious negligence under Article 2180,
particularly in hiring or continuing in its hire the driver
despite his reputation for being a reckless driver.

Q.

Give the rule regarding character evidence in
criminal cases.

A.

Accused in criminal case
The accused may prove his good moral
character if pertinent to the moral trait involved in
the offense charged.
For instance, in a charge for estafa, the
accused may prove his good moral character.
However in a charge for failing to register securities
before offering them for sale, there is no moral
trait involved.
The prosecution may not prove the accused's
bad moral character unless the defense opens the
door for rebuttal by introducing evidence of the
accused's good moral character. (S54[a][2] R130).

Offended parly in criminal case
Evidence of the good or bad moral character of
the offended party is admissible if it tends to
establish the probability or improbability of the
offense charged. (S54[a][1] R130).

906

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Thus evidence of the violent character of the
victim is relevant to prove self-defense by the
accused. Evidence of his non-violent character
can be adduced by the prosecution to show the
accused's guilt.
Q.

Give the rule on character evidence regarding
witnesses.

Adverse party's witness

The adverse party may introduce evidence that
a witness's general reputation for honesty, integrity,
or truth is bad for purposes of impeaching the
witness. The witness may not be impeached by
evidence of particular wrongful acts, except that it
may be shown by the examination of the witness,
or record of the judgment, that he has been
convicted of an offense. (S11 R132).
Party's witness

If the good character of a witness has been
impeached, the party presenting the witness may
rehabilitate his witness by presenting evidence of
his good character. (S54[c] R 130). A party cannot
present evidence of the good moral character of his
witness if the same has not been impeached. (Id.).
Q.

The accused was charged with murder. The
accused raised the defense of denial and alibi.
The accused testified that victim was a drug
addict and thief and presented a letter from the
victim'smother to Mayor Malonzo surrendering
her son because he was a drug addict and a
thief. The accused contended that the victim
could have been killed by any one of those from
907

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

whom he had stolen. The prosecution objected
on the ground that such evidence is irrelevant.
Should the objection be sustained?
A.

Yes. Proof of the bad moral character of the victim
is irrelevant to establish the probability or
improbability of his killing since the accused did not
allege that the victim was the aggressor or that the
killing was made in self-defense. (Pp v. Lee, G.R.
No. 139070, 29 May 2002).

Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage
against her husband Panibugho and his
paramour Kalunya. May the court allow or give
weight to the following evidence presented by
the prosecution over the vigorous objection of
the accused? Give reasons.

xxx
(d) Testimony of Kuya, Panibugho's brother,
who testified that no man in their family for
at least three generations has been content
with only one woman and that this
reputation and tradition is established in
their community. (86 Bar Q1 Od).
A.

The court should not allow or give weight to the
testimony of Kuya.
Under the Rules of Evidence, evidence as
to the bad character of the accused cannot be
proved by the prosecution unless in rebuttal.
[S54[a](2) R130)
Here the reputation evidence tends to prove the
bad moral character of the accused by showing that
he is a philanderer. Hence the same is inadmissible.

908

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

Note: An objection based on hearsay would
have been overruled since common reputation is
an exception to the hearsay rule. The proper
objection is that under S54[a][2] R130.
Q.

How is character proved?

A.

Character is proved by: (1) reputation evidence, (2)
the witness's opinion, or (3) specific instances of
conduct. (ROS)

Reputation evidence
In all cases in which evidence of character or a
trait of character of a person is admissible, proof
may be made by testimony as to reputation or by
testimony in the form of an opinion.
Evidence of common reputation is the
standard method of proving character. Under S43
R130 common reputation is admissible to prove
moral character. Under S 11 R 132 a witness's
general reputation for honesty, integrity, or truth
may be impeached by reputation evidence.
Reputation regarding moral character is that
existing in the community in which a person lives or
is well-known. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 494 [61h rev. ed.]).
It is submitted that such reputation may be that
existing among a person's associates. (See FRE
803[21]). The reason is that in modern urban
communities, individuals are more anonymous.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE
139 [2004 ed.]).

909

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Witness' opinion

The former rule was that a witness' opinion is
not admissible to prove character unless (1)
character itself in in issue, or (2) in rape cases
where opinion of the victim's past sexual conduct is
admissible if found relevant bi the court (Rape
Shield Rule, 5 R.A. No. 8505).1 0
The 2020 Rules on Evidence adopted the rule
in FRE 405(a) when in provided that "in all cases in
which evidence of character or a trait of character
of a person is admissible, proof may be made by
testimony ... in the form of an opinion."
Specific instances of conduct

Generally specific instances of conduct may
not be used to prove character. This would cause
unfair surprise upon the other party and result in
the case getting bogged down on collateral issues.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 138
[2004 ed.]; People v. Babiera, 52 Phil. 97).
When evidence of a person's character or
character trait is admissible, it may be proved by
testimony about the person's reputation or by
testimony in the form of an opinion. On crossexamination of the character witness, the court may
allow an inquiry into relevant specific instances of
the person's conduct. (S54[c] R130, FRE R405[a]).
In cases in which character or a trait of
character of a person is an essential element of a
charge, claim or defense,161 proof may also be
160

Under FRE 405(a), testimonyin opinion form is admissibleto provecharacter.

E.g.,

161

in libel or slander and the defense is truth.
BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 136 (2004 ed.)).

910

(ANTONIO R.

J9JC9B0M

Rule 130
Rules Of Admissibility

made of specific instances of that person's conduct.
(S54[c] R130 adopting FRE 405[b]).
Also in rape, evidence of complainant's past
sexual conduct is admissible if found relevant by
court. (Rape Shield Rule, 5 RA 8505).
Q.

D was prosecuted for homicide for allegedly
beating up V to death with an iron pipe.
(a)

May the prosecution introduce evidence
that V had a good reputation for peacefulness
and non-violence?

(b)

May D introduce evidence of specific violent
acts by V? (02 Bar Q14)

A.
(a) Yes the prosecution may introduce evidence
that V had a good reputation for peacefulness
and non-violence.
Evidence of the good or bad moral character of
the offended party is admissible if it tends to
establish the probability or improbability of the
offense charged. (S54[a][1] R 130).
Here the evidence would tend to establish
the probability of homicide by showing that D
was the aggressor and countering any claim of selfdefense by D.
(b) No, D may not introduce evidence of specific
violent acts by V. The general rule is that the
character of a person must be proved by
reputation evidence and not by evidence of
specific violent acts. (People v. Babiera, 52 Phil.
97,110).
911

J9JC9B0M

RULE 131. BURDEN OF PROOF, BURDEN
OF EVIDENCE, AND PRESUMPTIONS
Q.

What is burden of proof?

A.

Burden of proof is the duty of a party to present
evidence on the facts in issue necessary to
establish his claim or defense by the amount of
evidence required by law. (S1 R131).
The burden of proof rests upon a party
asserting the affirmative of an issue. Thus Plaintiff
who alleges defendant's negligence has the burden
of proof. This is often with the Plaintiff but it need
not necessarily be so. The Defendant in a suit for
enforcement of written contract who raises the
defense of forgery has the burden of proof of
proving forgery. The key query is who is the party
asserting the affirmative of an issue.

Q.

What is burden of evidence?

A.

Burden of evidence is the duty of a party to present
evidence sufficient to establish or rebut a fact
in issue to establish a prima facie case. (S1 R131,
2020 Rules on Evidence). Initially the party having
the burden of proof also has the burden of evidence.

Q.

Does burden of proof shift? How about burden
of evidence?

A.

Burden of proof never shifts but burden of evidence
may shift from one party to another in the course of
the proceedings, depending on the exigencies of
the case. (Id.).

912

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions

Thus in a torts case, if the plaintiff has presented
evidence on defendant's negligence sufficient to
establish his claim, the burden of evidence to
disprove the plaintiff's claim that defendant is
negligent shifts to the defendant. If the defendant
presents sufficient countervailing evidence then the
burden of evidence shifts back to the plaintiff again.
Take note however that the burden of proof on the
issue of negligence is always with the plaintiff.
Q.

What is the equipoise doctrine?

A.

The equipoise doctrine states that where the
evidence on an particular issue is in equipoise or
level or where the party not having the burden of
proof has produced countervailing evidence, the
result is that the party with the burden of proof will
lose out on that particular issue. (Rivera v. CA, G.R.
115625, 23 January 1998).
Hence in a torts case where the parties'
evidence on whether or not the defendant was
negligent is evenly balanced, the plaintiff will lose
out since he has not proven the defendant's
negligence by preponderant evidence.
In a criminal case where the burden of proof of
showing the accused's guilt is with the prosecution,
if the defense has presented countervailing (not
necessarily equalizing) evidence which will cast
reasonable doubt, then the prosecution will lose out
on the issue of the accused's guilt.

Q.

G files a complaint for recovery of possession
and damages against F. In the course of the
trial, G marked his evidence but his counsel
failed to file a formal offer of evidence. F then
presented in evidence tax declarations in the
913

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

name of his father to establish that his father is
a co-owner of the property. The court ruled in
favor of F, saying that G failed to prove sole
ownership of the property in the face of F's
evidence. Was the court correct? Explain briefly.
(07 Bar Q7b).

A.

The court ruled correctly but not on the basis of F's
countervailing evidence but on the ground that G
failed to discharge his burden of proof.
In an action for recovery of possession of
property, the burden of proof is with the plaintiff.
Since the plaintiff did not file a formal offer of
evidence, the court had no evidence to consider.
Evidence not formally offered may not be
considered by the court.
While tax declarations are not proof of
ownership, a party having the burden of proof cannot
rely on the weakness of the other party's evidence
but must reiy on the strength of his own evidence.
Here G did not file a formal offer of evidence. Hence
the trial court had no evidence to consider.162

Q.

What is a presumption? Explain briefly the
nature of presumptions.

A.

A presumption is an assumption of fact resulting from
a rule of law which requires such fact to be assumed
from another fact or set of facts. (STEVEN H. GIFIS,
LAW DICTIONARY 160 [1975]).

162The
question is ambiguous since it did not state the details of G's
testimonial evidence. Although G failed to fonnally offer his documentary and
object evidence, his testimonial evidence may have been sufficient to establish
his ownership of the property.

914

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions

Most presumptions are based on logical
inferences. An underlying fact gives rise to a
reasonable inference that another fact (the
presumption) exists, since there is a logical
connection between the fact in existence and the
fact presumed. Essentially a presumption is based
on a probability ( albeit a high one), that is, if an
underlying fact exists it is highly probable that the
presumed fact also exists. Since it is based on a
probability, a presumption may be rebutted. An
example of this kind of presumption is that a person
found in possession of a thing taken in the doing of
a recent wrongful act is the taker and the doer of
the whole act. (S3[i] R131).
Other presumptions are based on the
generally known results of wide human experience.
An example is the presumption that a person takes
ordinary care of his concerns. (S3[d] R131).
Q.

Distinguish a conclusive presumption from a
disputable presumption.

A.

A conclusive presumption (also known as a nonrebuttable presumption) is one which no evidence,
however strong, no argument, or consideration will be
permitted to overcome. In the strict sense, since a
presumption always properly refers to a rebuttable
assumption of a fact, when the term presumption is
used in the conclusive sense, it is not a true
presumption but is actually a statement of a rule of
substantive law. (See McCormick, Evidence 804
(2d ed. 1972]).
On the other hand a disputable or rebuttable
presumption is one which is satisfactory if

915

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

uncontradicted, but may be contradicted
overcome by other evidence. (83 R131 ).

and

Q.

Give instances of conclusivepresumptions.

A.

The following are instances of conclusive presumptions:
(a) Whenever a party has, by his own declaration,
act, or omission, intentionally and deliberately
led another to believe a particular thing is true,
and to act upon such belief, he cannot, in
any litigation arising out of such declaration,
act, or omission, be permitted to falsify it.
(82[a] R132).
(b) The tenant is not permitted to deny the title of
his landlord at the time of the commencement
of the relation of landlord and tenant between
them. (82[b] R131 ).
(c)

Presumption that an incomplete but delivered
negotiable instrument has been filled up
properly and presumption that a complete but
undelivered negotiable instrument has been
delivered validly if such instruments are in the
hands of a holder in due course. (814 & 16,
Negotiable Instruments Law).

(d)

An acknowledgment in a policy or contract of
insurance of the receipt of premium is
conclusive evidence of its payment, so far as
to make the policy binding, notwithstanding
any stipulation therein that it shall not be
binding until the premium is actually paid.
(878 Insurance Code).

916

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions
Q.

Ermitano leased a house and lot to Paglas.
During the lease period, Paglas learned that
Ermitanohad mortgagedthe houseand lot to Yap
who later acquired it at the foreclosure sale.
Paglasbought the realty from Yap. Ermitanolater
filed an unlawful detainer case against Paglas
which was dismissed, the trial court saying that
Paglashad acquiredthe right to possess the land
by buying it from Yap. On appeal, Ermitano
argues that Paglas is not permitted to deny
Ermitano'stitle over the realty in accordancewith
Sec. 2(b) of Rule 131 which provides that "the
tenant is not permitted to deny the title of his
landlord at the time of the commencementof the
relation of landlord and tenant betweenthem." Is
Ermitano'sargumentcorrect?

A.

No. The presumption under S2(b) R 131 does not
bar a tenant from challenging the landlord's title by
title subsequent to the commencement of the lease
contract. Here the tenant Paglas had purchased
the leased land from the mortgagee-purchaser in
the extrajudicial foreclosure sale and hence his title
was subsequent to the commencementof the lease
contract. (Ermitano v. Paglas, 23 January 2013).

Q.

Give examples of disputable presumptions.

A.

1) That a person is innocent of crime or wrong.
(S3[a] R131 ).
2) That evidence willfully suppressed would
be adverse if produced. (S3[e] R131 ). The
presumption does not apply from the
prosecution's failure to present the NBI agents
and the fingerprint and paraffin tests, since the
917

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

defense could have obtained the said evidence
which was equally available to it (People v.
Realon, G.R. L-30832, 29 August 1980). The
presumption does not also apply if the evidence
claimed to be suppressed is merely corroborative .
(People v. Casini/lo, 213 SCRA 777 [1992]). If
the suppression is in exercise of a privilege, like
the attorney-client privilege, the presumption
does not apply. (People v. Navaja, G.R. No.
104044, 30 March 1993).
3) That a negotiable instrument was given or
indorsed for a sufficient consideration. (S3[s]
R 131 ). That there was a sufficient consideration
for a contract. (S3[r] R131). In Travel-On v.
Court of Appeals, 210 SCRA 351, the SC held
that a check is by itself sufficient evidence of the
debt and that the check holder does not need to
present the covering documents or invoices.
4) That a letter duly directed and mailed was
received in the regular course of mail. (S3(v)
R131 ). Hence one need not present the return
card. The facts to be proved in order to raise
this presumption are: (1) the letter was properly
addressed with postage prepaid, and (2) the
letter was mailed. (Barcelon, Roxas Securities
v. CIR, G.R. 157064, 7 August 2006). Note
however that in BP 22 cases, the SC requires
actual proof that the accused received notice
of dishonor.
5) That a man and a woman deporting themselves
as husband and wife have entered into a lawful
contract of marriage. (S3[aa] R131 ). Hence they
need not present a marriage certificate.
918

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions

6) That a printed or published book, purporting to
be printed or published by a public authority,
was so printed or published. (S3[gg]).
7) That a printed or published book, purporting to
contain reports of cases adjudged in tribunals of
a foreign country where the book is published,
contains correct reports of such cases.
(S3[hh]). Thus you do not need to get a certified
true copy of the case.
Q.

Petitionersfiled a complaintagainst Respondents
Abra Valley Colleges, Inc. and its officers for
inspection of corporate books and records.
Respondents filed an answer raising the
affirmative defense that Petitioners are not
stockholders of Abra Valley. Respondents
however did not present the stock-and-transfer
book to prove their affirmative defense that
Petitioners are not stockholders. Will this give
rise to the presumption that evidence willfully
suppressedwould be adverseif produced?

A.

Yes. (lnsigne v. Abra Valley Colleges, Inc., 29 July
2015, Bersamin, J.)

Q.

On 14 February 1990, respondent Eduardo De
Guzman,Sr., along with Dong Hee Kim, Chui Ho
Shin, and Bong II Kim, all of whom were
incorporators of Yeson InternationalPhilippines,
Inc., executed a
Continuing Guaranty/
Comprehensive Surety wherein they bound
themselves,jointly and severally,to pay any and
all obligations, including all accrued interest and
charges, attorney's fees, and costs of litigation,
obtained by the company from petitioner PNB.
The agreementprovidesthat "this is a continuing
919

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

guaranty and shall remain in full force and effect
until written notice shall have been received by
you PNB that it has been revoked by the
undersigned." PNB later sued De Guzmanon the
surety agreement upon default of Yeson. De
Guzman raised the defense that he had sent by
registeredmail a letter of revocationto PNB. PNB
denied receiving the letter. Unfortunately, De
Guzman could not obtain a certification from the
Muntinlupa Post Office as to the delivery of the
said letter because all records of dispatches for
the year 1991 were already disposed by said
office due to the fact that De Guzman'srequestin
2010 has already passed their retention period.
However he was able to present the registry
receipt proving that he sent the letter by registered
mail. Did De Guzmanadduce adequateproof that
he had mailedthe revocationletterto PNB?
A.

Yes. On the basis of of S3(v) R131 when a mail
matter was sent by registered mail, there arises a
disputable presumption that it was received in the
regular course of mail. The facts to be proved in
order to raise this presumption are: (a) that the
letter was properly addressed with postage prepaid: . - 
and (b) that it was mailed. In Comrriissloner of
Internal Revenue v. Metro Star Superama, Inc.,
citing Barcelon, Roxas Securities, Inc. (now known
as UBP Securities, Inc.) v. Commissioner of
Internal Revenue, the Court had the occasion to
stress that in order to prove the fact of mailing, the
second requisite above, it is important that a party
proving the same present sufficient evidence
thereof, such as the registry receipt issued by the
Bureau of Posts or the registry return card which

920

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions

would have been signed by the petitioner or its
authorized representative.
The presumption thus arises that De
Guzman's letter of revocation was received by PNB
in the regular course of mail. PNB failed to
overcome said presumption. The Court had
consistently ruled that when a document is shown
to have been properly addressed and actually
mailed, there arises a presumption that the same
was duly received by the addressee, and it
becomes the burden of the latter to prove
otherwise. Here, PNB's bare, self-serving denial,
and nothing more, does little to persuade. To the
Court, PNB's mere denial cannot prevail over the
records presented by De Guzman such as the letter
of revocation and the registry receipt, which
constitute documentary evidence enjoying the
presumption that, absent clear and convincing
evidence to the contrary, these were duly received
in the regular course of mail. (Allied Banking Corp.
v. De Guzman, 9 July 2018, Peralta, J.)163
Q.

Plaintiff,pursuantto a memorandumof agreement
with defendant spouses, invested PS million in
the defendants' corporation (which operates
amusementcenters in various malls) for which
he would be entitled to 50% of the net profits.
Under the agreement, defendants would have
exclusive control over the operations of the
amusement centers, with plaintiff acting as a
mere investor in the said ventures. Plaintiff
sued the defendants for his share of the net

163Compare
with Barcelon, Roxas Securities v. CIR, 7 August 2006, where
the addressee's bare denial was sufficient to overthrow the presumption under
S3(v) R131 since the sender did not present the registry receipt or return card or
post office certification.

921

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

profit. He presented evidence showing the
corporation's gross revenue but not its net
profits. The defendants did not present any
evidence. The RTC dismissed plaintiff's complaints
since all his evidence showed only the gross
revenue but not the net profits of the corporation.
Was the dismissal of the plaintiff's complaint
correct?
A.

No, the dismissal of the complaint was not correct.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the presumption is
that evidence willfully suppressed would be
adverse if produced.
Here defendants had exclusive control over
the operations of the amusement centers, with
plaintiff acting as a mere investor. The plaintiff had
no access to the corporation's financial statements
which were all in the possession of defendants.
Defendants could have easily rebutted plaintiff's
claim for his share of net profits by producing the
pertinent documents. Thus the presumption that
evidence willfully suppressed would be adverse if
produced is applicable.
Plaintiff is entitled to receive his share of the
net profits, even though he failed to prove the exact
amount thereof. The Supreme Court awarded
plaintiff temperate damages of roughly 50% of the
gross revenue. (Evangelista v. Andolong, 16
November 2016, Perlas-Bernabe,J.).

Q.

Mary Grace Natividad S. Poe-Llamanzares
(petitioner) was found abandoned as a newborn
infant in the Parish Church of Jaro, lloilo on 3
September 1968. Subsequently she ran for
President of the Philippines in 2016. It was argued

922

J9JC9B0M

Rule 131
Burden Of Proof, Burden Of Evidence,
And Presumptions

that she was disqualified to run for President
because she is a foundling whose parents are
unknown and hence there is no evidence that she
is a natural-born Filipino citizen. The petitioner
argues that the fact that she was found in lloilo
raises a disputable presumption that her parents
are Filipino citizens and that the burden of proof
was on the oppositorsto show that her parents
were not Filipino citizens. Is the petitioner correct
in her argument?
A.

Yes. There is a disputable presumption that things
have happened according to the ordinary course of
nature and the ordinary habits of life. (S3[y] R131).
All of the foregoing evidence, that a person with
typical Filipino features is abandoned in Catholic
Church in a municipality where the population of
the Philippines is overwhelmingly Filipinos such that
there would be more than a 99% chance that a
child born in the province would be a Filipino, would
indicate more than ample probability if not statistical
certainty, that petitioner's parents are Filipinos. To
assume otherwise is to accept the absurd, if not the
virtually impossible, as the norm. (Poe-Llamanzares
v. COMELEC, 8 March 2016, e.b., Perez, J.).

Q.

What is the effect of a presumption in civil
actions and proceedings?

A.

In all civil actions and proceedings not otherwise
provided for by the law or these Rules, a
presumption imposes on the party against whom it
is directed the burden of going forward with
evidence to rebut or meet the presumption. (S5
R131, 2020 Rules on Evidence).

923

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the rule in case of inconsistent
presumptionsin a civil action or proceeding?

A.

If presumptions are inconsistent, the presumption
that is founded upon weightier considerations of
policy shall apply. If considerations of policy are of
equal weight, neither presumptionapplies. (Id.).

Q.

What is the effect of a presumptionagainst the
accused in a criminal case?

A.

If a presumed fact that establishes guilt is an
element of the offense charged or negates a
defense, the existence of the basic fact must be
proved beyond reasonable doubt and the
presumed fact follows from the basic fact beyond
reasonable doubt. (S6 R130, Rule on Evidence).

924

J9JC9B0M

RULE 129. WHAT NEED NOT BE PROVED
Q.

What matters need not be proved in court?

A.

Matters of which the court has taken judicial notice
and judicial admissions do not require proof.

Q.

Define judicial notice.

A.

Judicial notice is a process whereby the court takes
note of certain facts which are capable of being
known to a veritable certainty by consulting sources
of indisputable accuracy, thereby relieving one
party of the burden of producing evidence to prove
these facts. (STEVEN H. GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY
112 [1975]). Judicial notice may be mandatory or
discretionary.

Q.

When is judicial notice mandatory?

A.

A court shall take judicial notice, without
introduction of evidence, of: (SIP NTG)
1)

the

STATES. The existence and territorial extent
of states, their political history, forms of
government and symbols of nationality.

2) INTERNATIONAL LAW. The law of nations, the
admiralty and maritime courts of the world and
their seals.
3) PHILIPPINES. The political constitution and
history of the Philippines, the official acts of the
legislative, executive, and judicial departments
of the National Government of the Philippines.
4) LAWS OF NATURE.
5) MEASURE OF TIME.
925

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

6) GEOGRAPHICAL DIVISIONS.
Q.

Can a court take judicial notice of foreign laws?

A.

Courts cannot take judicial notice of foreign laws.
The parties may however stipulate on what the
foreign law is in which case the same are judicial
admissions binding upon them and they cannot
take a contrary stance. (Philippine Commercial and
Industrial Bank v. Esco/in, G.R. 27936, 29
March 1974 ).

Q.

Can a court take judicial notice of ordinances?

A.

As a general rule no, since an ordinance is not an
official act of the legislative department of the
National Government of the Philippines. (S1 R129,
2020 Rules on Evidence).
However a court may take judicial notice of an
ordinance when required to do so by statute (e.g.,
Charter of the City of Manila) or when the municipal
ordinance is of public knowledge or capable of
unquestionable demonstration.

Q.

In a land dispute case, was it proper for the
Court of Appeals take judicial notice of the
Senate Report regarding the Maysilo Estate?

A.

Yes since it is an official act of the legislative
department
of the Philippines.
(S1
R129).
Nonetheless, the Senate Report shall not be
conclusive upon the courts, but will be examined
and evaluated based on its probative value. That
there is such a document as the Senate Report
was all that was conceded by the Court of Appeals.
It did not allow the Senate Report to determine the
decision on the case. ( CL T Realty Dev't Corp. v. HiGrade Feeds Corp., 2 September 2015, Perez, J.)

926

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

Q.

Should a court take judicial notice that Quezon
City was established only in 1939?

A.

Yes, since Quezon City was established by virtue of
a charter or law which is an official act of the
legislature. (Bernas v. Estate of Yu Han Yat, 15
August 2018, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Can the Court of Appeals take judicial notice of
cases previously decided by it?

A.

No. It is well settled that, as a general rule, courts
are not authorized to take judicial notice, in the
adjudication of cases pending before them, of the
contents of the records of other cases, even when
such cases have been tried or are pending in the
same court, and notwithstanding the fact that both
cases may have been heard or are actually
pending before the same judge. (Id.).

Q.

Malayan Insurance Company, as subrogee of
the consignee, filed an action for damages
against PetitionerAsian Terminals,Inc. Malayan
alleged that it was the negligence of ATl's
stevedoresin unloading the cargo which caused
the loss and damage to the insured cargo. The
RTC ruled in favor of Malayan Insurance. ATI
argued that the trial court should have taken
judicial notice of Section 7.01, Article VII of the
ManagementContractfor cargo handling services
it entered with the Philippine Ports Authority,
which limits petitioner's liability to ?5,000.00 per
package. Is ATl's argumentcorrect?

A

No. The Management Contract entered into by
petitioner and the PPA is clearly not among the
matters which the courts can take judicial notice
of. It cannot be considered an official act of the

927

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

executive department. The PPA, which was
created by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 857, as
amended, is a government-owned and controlled
corporation in charge of administering the ports in
the country. Obviously, the PPA was only
performing a proprietary function when it entered
into a Management Contract with petitioner. As
such, judicial notice cannot be applied. (Asian
Terminals Inc. v. Malayan Insurance Co., 4 April
2011, Del Castillo, J.)

Q. When is judicial notice discretionary?
A.

A court may take judicial notice of matters which
are of public knowledge, or are capable of
unquestionable demonstration, or ought to be
known to judges because of their judicial functions.
(S2 R129).

Q. A resident American, who came here from
Massachusetts,made a Will where he stated that,
in form, it is executed in accordance with
Massachusetts law. The Will, instituting his
Filipino widow as his sole heir, would not be valid
in form under Philippine law. Upon his death,the
widow presented the Will to the Regional Trial
Court of Manila. Probate was objected to by
distant relatives of the testator in California.The
Judge had studied in Harvard,and was familiar
with Massachusettslaw. Without the introduction
of formal evidence, he granted probate, stating
that the Will was, indeed, executedin accordance
with Massachusettslaw.
How should the matter be resolved on
appeal? Explain your answer. (80 Bar Q13ed)

928

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

A.

On appeal, the order granting allowance of the will
should be reversed.
The Supreme Court has held that a Philippine
court cannot take judicial notice of foreign laws
which have to be proved in evidence just like any
other fact.
Here what was involved was a foreign law and
no evidence regarding the foreign law was
adduced. The fact that the judge was familiar with
Massachusetts law will not dispense with the
requirement of evidence since a judge's personal
knowledge is not equivalent to judicial notice.

Q.

President Estrada assails the Supreme Court's
decision for adverting to newspaper accounts of
events to reach the conclusion that he has
resigned. Is President Estrada's protestation valid?

A.

No. The events mentioned are facts which are wellestablished and cannot be refuted. These are: (1)
Governor Chavit's expose, (2) "I accuse speech" of
Sen. Guingona, (3) the impeachment trial of the
petitioner, (4) the testimonies of Clarissa Ocampo
and former secretary Edgardo Espiritu, (5) Estrada's
agreement to hold a snap election and the opening
of the controversial second envelope, etc. These are
facts within judicial notice by the Supreme Court.
There was no need to cite their news accounts. The
news accounts only buttressed these facts as facts.
For all his loud protestations, Estrada has not
singled out any of these facts as false. (Estrada v.
Desierto, G.R. Nos. 146710-15, 3 April 2001). Under
82 R129, a court may take judicial notice of matters
which are of public knowledge.

929

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May a court take judicial notice of a resolution
by the board of governors of the Development
Bank of the Philippines authorizing its branch
managers to sign the verification and
certification against forum shopping?

A.

No. Courts are not, after all, expected to take
judicial notice of corporate board resolutions or a
corporate officers authority to represent a corporation.
The resolution should have been attached to the
petition for certiorari. Hence the dismissal of the
petition was proper. (DBP v. 'Court of Appeals, 7
October 2004 ).

Q.

May a court take judicial notice that vehicular
accidents cause whiplash injuries?

A.

No. This proposition is not public knowledge, or is
capable of unquestionable demonstration, or ought to
be known to judges because of their judicial functions.
Judges have no expertise in the field of medicine.
They are only tasked to apply and interpret the law on
the basis of the parties' pieces of evidence and their
corresponding legal arguments. (Dela Liana v. Biong,
4 December 2013, Brion, J.)

Q.

May courts take judicial notice that personality
disorders are generallyincurable?

A.

No since this is not a matter that courts are mandated
to take judicial notice under 81 R129. (Singson v.
Singson, 8 January 2018, Del Castillo, J.).

Q.

X sued Panasia Banking Inc. (Panasia),
contending that the bank had allowed his son to
make unauthorized withdrawals from him
account. The complaint was later amendedto
include Bank of Commerce on the allegation
930

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

that there was a merger between Bank of
Commerce and Panasia. In its judgment the trial
court held Bank of Commerce solidarilyliable
with Panasia for damages. In response to Bank
of Commerce's denial that it had merged with
Panasia and had bought only selected assets,
the trial court said that common sense dictates
that a bank will not just cherry pick assets. Was
the trial court's decision to hold Bank of
Commerce solidarilyliable proper?
A.

No. The RTC' s assumption that Bank of Commerce
had merged with Panasia and had thereby taken over
all of the assets and liabilities of the latter, including that
for the negligent handling of X's account, was
unfounded. Such assumption had neither factual nor
legal support in the records. Instead, the RTC should
have required X to present evidence of the merger,
including its terms, in view of the petitioner's specific
denial of the same.
Merger was an act that could not be assumed; its
details must be shown, and its effects must be based on
the terms adopted by the parties concerned (through
their respective boards of directors) and approved by
the proper government office or agency regulating the
merging parties. In effect the RTC took judicial notice of
the merger between Bank of Commerce and Panasia
Banking, Inc. Contrary to the findings and conclusions
of the RTC, the merger of Bank of Commerce and
Panasia was not of common knowledge. It was overly
presumptuous for the RTC to thereby assume the
merger because the element of notoriety as basis for
taking judicial notice of the merger was loudly lacking.
(Bank of Commerce v. Dela Cruz, 14 August 2017,
Bersamin, J.).
931

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May the RTC take judicial notice of an article
appearing in a website (www.himig.com.ph) in
ruling that the song "Lavandera Ko" is
protected by a copyright?

A.

No. The article in the website cited by the RTC
patently lacks a requisitefor it to be of judicial notice
to the court because such article is not well and
authoritativelysettled and is doubtful or uncertain. It
must be remembered that some articles appearing
in the internet or on websites are easily edited and
their sources are unverifiable, thus, sole reliance on
those articles is greatly discouraged.(Juan v. Juan,
23 August 2017, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Is a hearing required before a court may take
judicial notice of a matter?

A.

Yes. Whether under 81 or 82 of R129, a hearing is
required before the court may take judicial notice of
a matter. (83 R129). This is to allow the parties to
be heard on the matter.
DURING THE PRE-TRIAL AND THE TRIAL.
During the pre-trial and the trial, the court, the
court motu proprio or upon motion, shall hear the
parties on the propriety of taking judicial notice of
any matter.
BEFORE JUDGMENT OR ON APPEAL. The
court, motu proprio or upon motion, may take
judicial notice of any matter and shall hear the the
parties thereon if such matter is decisive of a
material issue in the case. (8.3 R129).

932

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

Q.

What is a judicial admission?

A.

A judicial admission is an admission, oral or written,
made by a party in the course of the proceedings in
the same case. It does not require proof. (84 R129).

Q.

Give examples of judicial admissions.

A.
a) The genuineness and due execution of an
actionable document copied in or attached to a
pleading is deemed admitted by the adverse
party if he does not specifically deny it under
oath and set forth what he claims to be the
facts. (88 R8).
b) Material averment in the complaint, other than
those as to the amount of unliquidated
damages, shall be deemed admitted when not
specifically denied. (811 R8).
c) In a request for admission under R26, each of
the matters of which an admission is requested
shall be deemed admitted unless within the
period designated in the request which shall not
be less than 15 days after service thereof, the
party to whom the request is directed files and
serves upon the requesting party a sworn
statement either denying specifically the matters
of which an admission is requested or setting
forth in detail the reasons why he cannot
truthfully either admit or deny those matters. (82
R26). Take note however that any admission
made by a party pursuant to such request is for
the purpose of the pending action only and shall

933

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

not constitute an admission by him for any other
purpose nor may the same be used against him
in any other proceeding. (83 R26).
d)

Stipulation of facts. (Diego v. Sandiganbayan,
339 SCRA 592).

e) Admissions in the pleadings.
Q.

P filed an action for collection of loan against 0.
P attached to the complaint a copy of the
promissory note evidencing the loan signed by
0. 0 filed an unsworn answer specifically
denying that he signed the note. After the
presentation of his testimonial evidence, P
rested his case forgetting to formally offer in
evidence the promissory note. The court
rendered judgment in P's favor taking into
consideration the promissory note. On appeal,
O assigns as error the court's taking into
consideration the promissory note although it
was not formally offered in evidence. Is D's.
assignmentof error meritorious?164

A.

No. D's failure to specifically deny under oath the
promissory note which was an actionable document
resulted in D's implied admission of its genuineness
and due execution. The same is a judicial admission
and hence does not require proof pursuant to
84 R129.

Q.

X sued Y, a shipping co., basedon a contract of
carriage contained in a bill of lading. The bill of
lading,an actionabledocument,was pleadedand
attached to the complaint. Y, without alleging
anything else, merely assailedthe validity of the
Based

164

on Question No. 14 of 1974 Bar.

934

_

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

agreementin the bill of lading for being contrary
to public policy. After presentingevidence,X did
not formally offer for admission the bill of lading.
The court ruled for X. On motion for
reconsideration,Y alleged that X failed to prove
his action as the bill of lading was not formally
offered. Decide.(96 Bar Q15-2).
A.

Motion for reconsideration is denied. Y's failure to
specifically deny under oath the bill of lading which
was an actionable document resulted in his implied
admission of its genuineness and due execution.
The same is a judicial admission and hence does
not require proof pursuant to S4 R129.

Q.

Is the Defendant's failure to file an answer to
the complaint an implied admission of the
material allegations thereof?

A.

No. Under S3 R9, where the defendant has been
declared in default, the court may in its discretion
require the claimant to submit evidence. Evidently
this presupposes that the defendant had not made
an implied admission of the material averments of
the complaint. (See Heirs of de Guzman v. Perona,
2 July 2010, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant for collection of the
purchase price of a land in the amount of
P2,200,000.Defendantin her answer stated that
she had paid P2 million and therefore owes
the Plaintiff only P200,000. During the trial,
Defendant, without objection, presented a
receipt showing payment of the P200,000.Nor
did the Plaintiff object to the admissibility of the
receipt when it was formally offered. The trial
court rendered judgment dismissing the case
935

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

stating that Defendant had fully paid her
obligation. On appeal, Defendantcontends that
the trial court erred in considering the evidence
of paymentsince there was a judicial admission
by Defendantthat she still owes P200,000.Is the
Defendant'scontention correct?
A.

No. The benefit of a judicial admission may be lost
by failure to object to the presentation of evidence
contradicting it. It is noteworthy that when
Defendant presented the evidence of payment,
Plaintiff did not object thereto. When the receipt
was formally offered as evidence, Plaintiff did not
manifest their objection to the admissibility of said
document on the ground that payment was not an
issue. Since there was an implied consent on the
part of Plaintiff to try the issue of payment, even if
no motion was filed and no amendment of the
pleading has been ordered, the RTC cannot be
faulted for admitting respondent's testimonial and
documentary evidence to prove payment. (Dela
Cruz v. Concepcion, 11 October 2012, Peralta,J.).

Q.

In an action for reconveyanceof a parcel of land
filed in the Regional Trial Court, the defendant,
through his lawyer, filed an answer therein
admitting the avermentin the complaint that the
land was acquired by the plaintiff through
inheritance from his parents, the former
owners thereof.
Subsequently, the defendant changed
his lawyer and, with leave of court, amended
the answer. In the amended answer, the
abovementionedadmission no longer appears;
instead, the alleged ownership of the land by
the plaintiff was denied coupled with the
936

J9JC9B0M

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

allegation that the defendant is the owner of the
land for the reason that he bought the same
from the plaintiff's parents during their lifetime.
After trial, the Regional Trial Court rendered
a decision upholding the defendant's ownership
of the land.
On appeal, the plaintiff contended that the
defendant is bound by the admission contained
in his original answer.
Is the contention of plaintiff correct? Why?
(93 Bar Q4)
A.

No, the contention of plaintiff is not correct.
Under S8 R10, an amended pleading
supersedes the pleading that it amends. Hence the
admissions in the superseded pleading cease to be
judicial admissions and may not be considered by
the court unless offered in evidence.
Here there was no showing that the plaintiff
offered the original answer in evidence.

Q.

May a judicial admission be contradicted?

A.

No, except by showing that it was made through
palpable mistake or that the imputed admission
was not, in fact, made. (S4 R129).

937

J9JC9B0M

RULE 132. PRESENTATION OF EVIDENCE
Q.

How is the examination of a witness presented
in a trial or a hearing done?

A.

The examination of witness presented in a trial or a
hearing shall be done in open court and under oath
or affirmation. Unless the witness is incapacitated
to speak or the question calls for a different mode
of answer, the answers of the witness shall be
given orally. (81 R132).165

Q.

Give exceptions to the rule that the witness's
examination shall be done in open court
and orally.

A.

The following are exceptions to the rule of opencou rt examination of a witness:
a) In civil cases covered by the Rule on Summary
Procedure, the testimony of a witness shall be
by way of affidavit. (89 Rule on Summary
Procedure). There is no oral examination
of a witness.
b) In criminal cases covered by the Rule on
Summary Procedure, the affidavits submitted by
the parties shall constitute the direct testimonies
of the witnesses who executed the same,
subject to cross-examination, redirect or recross
examination. (815 Rule on Summary Procedure).
c) Cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC) and situations referred to

165The
exceptions to the general rule of open-court examination have
swallowed up the general rule insofar as direct examination is concerned.
Live examination of a witness is still applicable to cross-examination, re-direct,
and re-cross.

938

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

in the Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial
of Criminal Cases. The judicial affidavit shall
take the place of the witness' direct testimony.
d) Matters regarding the admissibility and evidentiary
weight of electronic documents may be proved
by affidavits subject to cross by adverse party.
(S1 R9, Rules on Electronic Evidence).
Q.

What cases are covered by the Judicial Affidavit
Rule?

A.

The Judicial Affidavit Rule shall apply to all actions,
proceedings, and incidents requiring the reception
of evidence before the courts, investigating bodies
and officers authorized by the SC to receive
evidence, special courts and quasi-judicial bodies.
This rule shall apply to all criminal actions:
(1) Where the maximum of the imposable penalty
does not exceed six years;
(2) Where the accused agrees to the use of judicial
affidavits, irrespective of the penalty involved; or
(3) With respect to the civil aspect of the actions,
whatever the penalties involved are.166

Q.

May a witness testify in narrative form?

A.

No. The witness's testimony should be elicited by
way of questions and answers. (S1 & 82 R132).
Thus if the witness does a narration instead of
answering the question, the answer may be

1nsofar as criminal actions are concerned, it is largely the Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases which governs. This is an
example of the confusion engendered by too many special rules of procedure or
evidence which tend to overlap.
166

939

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

stricken out upon objection. (839 R132). The
reason is that if a witness testifies in narrative form,
the adverse party is deprived of the opportunity to
object to the testimony beforehand.
An exception is under S 19 of the Rule on
Examination of a Child Witness which provides that
the court may allow a child witness to testify in
narrative form.
Q.

What is the form of testimonyin criminal cases?

A.

(a) For First Level Courts
In all criminal cases, including those covered
by the Rule on Summary Procedure, the testimonies
of witnesses shall consist of the duly subscribed
written statements given to law enforcement or
peace officers or the affidavits or counter-affidavits
submitted before the investigating prosecutor, and
if such are not available, testimonies shall be in the
form of judicial affidavits, subject to additional direct
and cross-examination questions. (JAW)
The trial prosecutor may dispense with the
sworn written statements submitted to the law
enforcement or peace officers and prepare the
judicial affidavits of the affiants or modify or revise
the said sworn statements before presenting it as
evidence.
(b) For Second Level Courts, Sandiganbayan and
Court of Tax Appeals
In criminal cases where the demeanor of the
witness is not essential in determining the
credibility of said witness, such as forensic
chemists, medico-legal officers, investigators, auditors,
accountants, engineers, custodians, expert witnesses

940

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

and other similar witnesses, who will testify on the
authenticity, due execution and the contents of
public documents and reports,167 and in criminal
cases that are transactional in character, such as
falsification, malversation, estafa, or other crimes
where the culpability or innocence of the accused
can be established through documents, the
testimonies of the witnesses shall be the duly
subscribed written statements given to law
enforcement or peace officers or the affidavits or
counter-affidavitssubmitted before the investigating
prosecutor, and if such are not available,
testimonies shall be in the form of judicial affidavits,
subject to additional direct and cross-examination
questions. (JAW)
In all other cases where the culpabilityor the
innocence of the accused is based on the
testimonies of the alleged eyewitnesses, the
testimonies of these witnesses shall be in oral form.
(Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
CriminalCases).
Q.

Is this question on direct examination
objectionable: "What happened on July 12,
1999?" (02 Bar Q13b).

A.

Yes since it calls for a narrative testimony.
Narrative testimony is impliedly but clearly
proscribed by 81 and 82 R132 which requires that
a witness' testimony be elicited through questions
The general rule is that public officers do not need to testify on the

167

authenticity of public documents since these are prima facie proof of their
contents (823 R132) and moreover are an exception to the hearsay rule (844
R130). The situation referred to in the guidelines may be that provided for in
Sec. 13 of A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC (eff. 1 May 2014) wherein the court appearance
of government medical, chemical, or laboratory experts may be demanded by the
accused who is in detention for the purpose of cross-examination.

941

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

and answers.168 Here the form of the question does
not allow the adverse party a reasonable opportunity
to interpose any objection as he does not have any
idea of what answer the question calls for. The
direct examiner should reform the question to make
it more specific, without being leading. Thus: "On
July 12, 1999, did you go out on a trip?" The
question cannot be objected to as leading since it is
merely preliminary.
Q.

Is a witness obligated to answer questions?

A.

Yes, a witness must answer questions, although his
answer may tend to establish a claim against him.
(S3 R132). Refusal to answer as a witness
constitutes direct contempt. (S1 R71 ).

Q.

What are the rights of a witness?

A.

It is the right of a witness: (DRIPS)
1) To be protected from irrelevant, improper, or
insulting questions, and from harsh or insulting
demeanor.
2) Not to be detained longer than the interests of
justice require. SC Guidelines on Pre-trial and
Discovery ( effective 16 August 2004) exhort
courts to adhere strictly to the "One-Day
Examination of Witness" Rule subject to
justifiable exceptions. The Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases provides
that the court shall strictly adhere to the rule that
a witness has to be fully examined in one day.

While there is a statement in People v. Calixtro, G.R. No. 92355, 24
January 1991, that "there is no legal principle which prevents a witness from
giving his testimony in a narrative form if he is requested to do so by counsel,"
such statement is clearly not in accord with 81 and 82 R132 and should be
merely treated as obiter. See also 839 R132 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence.
166

942

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

3) Not to be examined except only as to matters
pertinent to the issue.
4) Not to give an answer which will tend to subject
him to a penalty for an offense unless otherwise
provided by law. (self-incrimination)
5) Not to give an answer which will tend to degrade
his reputation, unless it be to the very fact at
issue or to a fact from which the fact in issue
would be presumed. But a witness must answer
to the fact of his previous final conviction for an
offense. (S3 R132).
Q.

What is the order in the examination of an
individualwitness?

A.

The order in which an individual witness may be
examined is as follows:
a) Direct examination by the proponent.
b) Cross-examination by the opponent.
c) Re-direct examination by the proponent.
d) Re-cross examination by the opponent.

Q.

What is direct examination?

A.

Direct examination is the examination-in-chief of a
witness by the party presenting him on the facts
relevant to the issue. (S5 R132). In the light of the
judicial affidavit rule, most direct examinations are
now in the form of a judicial affidavit.

Q.

What is cross-examination?

A.

It is the examination of a witness by the adverse
party upon the termination of the direct examination.
(S6 R132).
943

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is the purpose and extent of crossexamination?

A.

The witness may be cross-examined by the adverse
party on any relevant matter with sufficient fullness
and freedom to test his accuracy and truthfulness
and freedom from interest or bias (atib) and to
elicit all imrprtant facts bearing upon the issue.
9
(S6 R132).1

Q.

What are the two rules regarding the scope of
cross-examination?

A.

The two rules regarding the scope of crossexamination are the English Rule and the American
Rule. Under the English Rule, the witness may be
cross-examined on all relevant aspects of the case
even if not covered in his direct. Under the American
Rule, a witness may be cross-examined only on
matters covered in his direct examination.

Q.

What rule do we follow in the Philippines?

A.

We follow the English Rule. This may be gleaned
from the wordings of S6 R132 which provides that
the witness may be cross-examined on any
relevant matter with sufficient fullness and freedom
to elicit all important facts bearing upon the issue.
However in two instances,
American Rule:

we follow the

(1) 813 R132: Cross-examination of a witness who
has been called as an ~dverse-party witness by
169The
2020 Rules on Evidence replaced the phrase "as to any matter
stated in the direct examination, or connected therewith" with "on any relevant
matter." The amendment emphasizes that the English Rule is the general rule in
cross-examination.
The old phrasing led to some trial courts erroneously
applying the American rather than the English Rule.

944

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

the other side or who has been declared as a
hostile or ynwilling witness upon the initiative of
the other side.
(2) S1{d) R115. Cross-examination of the accused
in a .Qriminal case.
Q.

In 1994,the Estate of Butte (the Estate) filed an
action for cancellation of titles, recovery of
properties, and damages against several
defendants,including petitioner spouses Reuben
and Minerva Dela Cruz (the Dela Cruzes) before
the Regional Trial Court (RTC)of Antipolo City.
On October 21, 1999 the Estate presented
Myron C. Papa (Myron), its executor, to testify
on the substance of the complaint. At the
conclusion of Myron's testimony on that day,
the RTC required the Estate and the latter
agreed to present Myron anew at the next
scheduled hearing to identify the originals of
certain exhibits, after which counsels for the
defendants,would begin to cross-examinehim.
But the Estate never got around recalling
Myron to the witness stand. Hewas taken ill and
diagnosed as suffering from stage four colon
and liver cancer, prompting the Estate's coadministrator, to seek repeated postponements
of hearings in the case to allow Myron undergo
intensive treatment. Later, the Estate filed a
motion for leave to have the defendants crossexamine Myron by deposition at the hospital
where he was confined. The RTC granted the
motion on February 22, 2001 and eventually set
the deposition-taking on September7, 2001 but
Myron passed away on August 16, 2001. The
Petitioners moved that Myron's direct testimony
945

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

be expunged on the ground that they were
not able to cross-examine him. Should the
motion be granted?
A.

Yes. Testimony of witness who died before he could
be cross-examined must be expunged if there is no
showing of delay or fault by the party waiting to
cross. Here there was no such fault or delay on the
part of the Petitioners. ( Sps. Dela Cruz v. Papa, 8
December 2010, Abad, J.)

Q.

What is re-direct examination? Give its purpose
and extent.

A.

Re-direct examination is the examination of the
witness by the proponent, after the witness had
been cross-examined. The witness may be examined
by the party calling him, to explain or supplement
his answers given during the cross-examination.
(S? R132).

Q.

On re-direct examination, may questions on
matters not dealt with during the crossexamination be allowed?

A.

Yes in the discretion of the court. (S? R 132).

Q.

What is re-cross-examination?

A.

Re-cross-examination is the examination of the
witness by the opponent, after the witness's redirect examination. (S8 R132).

Q.

May the witness be re-cross-examined on
matters not stated in his re-direct examination?

A.

Yes in the discretion of the court.

946

(S8 R132).

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

After the examination of a witness by both sides
has been concluded, may the witness be recalled?

A.

Yes but with leave of court. The court will grant or
withhold leave in its discretion, as the interests of
justice may require. (89 R132).

Q.

What is a leading question?

A.

One which suggests to the witness the answer
which the examining party desires.

Q.

Is a leading question allowed?

A.

As a rule a leading question is not allowed. The
reason for prohibiting leading questions is that it is
virtually the lawyer testifying rather than the witness.

Q.

When are leading questions allowed?

A.

Leading questions are allowed in the following
instances: (PICACHU)
On cross-examination.
On preliminary (background) matters.
Ignorant witness, child of tender years, feebleminded or deaf-mute witness.
Unwilling or hostile witness.
-

Adverse-party witness, or a director, officer, or
managing agent of a corporation, partnership,
or association which is an adverse party.
Child Witness (820 RECW). Court has discretion
to allow leading questions if the same will
further the interests of justice.

947

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

What is a misleadingquestion? Is it allowed?

A.

A misleading question is one which assumes as
true a fact not yet testified to by the witness or
contrary to that which he has previously stated. It is
never allowed. If asked on direct, the more precise
objection is that the question lacks basis. (810
R132).

Q.

What is meant by impeachment of a witness?

A.

Impeachment of a witness means to destroy or put
in doubt the credibility of the witness or his
testimony. It is not limited to showing that the
witness is lying but also to show that witness may
be mistaken in his observation or narration.

Q.

What are the methods of impeachment of the
adverse party's witness?

A.

The methods of impeachment of the adverse party's
witness are: (CRIC)
1) CONTRADICTORY EVIDENCE. Evidence
that the witness' testimony is wrong or untrue. The
purpose is not just to show an inconsistency but to
prove outright that the witness is mistaken or lying.
Thus if the witness testified that defendant's car
entered the intersection when the stoplight was
green in his favor but a video recording showed
otherwise, the video recording is contradictory
evidence. Predicate need not be laid.
2) REPUTATION EVIDENCE. Evidence that
the witness' general reputation for truth, honesty, or
integrity is bad. Note however that a party who is
allowed to impeach his own witness cannot do
so by evidence of the witness' bad character.
(813 R132).
948

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

3) INCONSISTENT STATEMENT. Evidence
that the witness has made at other times '
statements inconsistentwith his present testimony.
4) CONVICTION (FINAL). Evidence that the
witness has been convicted by final judgment of a
crime if (a) the crime was punishable by a penalty
exceeding one year or (b) the crime involved moral
turpitude, regardless of the penalty. However
evidence of a conviction is not admissible if the
conviction has been the subject of an amnesty or
annulmentof conviction.(812 R132)170 The evidence
may be shown by the examination of the witness,
or the record of the judgment. (811 R132).
Q.

Plaintiff's witness was asked on crossexamination whether he had failed a lie-detector
test. Maythis question be objected to?

A.

Yes, on the ground that a witness may not be
impeached by evidence of particular wrongful acts,
as for instance, lying. (811 R132). The purpose of
the question is to show that the witness was lying
and hence it is not proper impeachment of
the witness.

Q.

Plaintiff P presents witness W to testify that
Defendant D punched P without provocation.
On cross-examination, D's lawyer asked W if it
is true that W had lied in another court case. Is
the question objectionable?

A.

Yes, on the ground that a witness may be not be
impeached by evidence of particular facts or acts.
(811 R132, cf. FRE 608[b]).

17This

is a new provision in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

949

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

In the preceding question, assume that the
question was allowed by the trial court, and W
denied having lied in any court case. In his turn
to present evidence, may D present witness Y to
testify that W lied in a court case?

A.

No. Whether on cross or on his turn to present
evidence, D may not impeach W by evidence of
particular facts or acts.

Q.

In a prosecution for murder, the prosecutor
asks accused Darwin if he had been previously
arrested for violation of the Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act. As defense counsel, you
object. The trial court asks on what ground/s.
Respond. (10 Bar Q12).

A.

Insofar as the question tends to show that Darwin
had committed murder, I would object on the
ground that the evidence sought to be obtained is
irrelevant. There is no logical connection between
being arrested for the violation of the Anti-Graft Law
and committing the crime of murder.
insofar as the question tends to impeach
Darwin's testimony as a witness, the same is
objectionable on the ground that a witness may not
be impeached by evidence of particular wrongful
acts. (S11 R132).
Insofar as the question tends to elicit evidence of
Darwin's bad moral character, the same is
objectionable on the ground that the prosecution
cannot adduce evidence of the accused's bad moral
character except in rebuttal. (S54[a][2] R130).

950

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

The question may also be objected to on the
ground that it was not covered in the direct
examination if Darwin in his direct did not mention
anything about a previous arrest or criminal case.
(S1[d] R115).
Q.

What is meant by an inconsistent statement
which may be used to impeach a witness as
provided for in 514 R132?

A.

An inconsistent statement is a statement made by
the witness which unexplained is different from and
cannot be reconciled with the witness' present
testimony. It refers to a statement made outside of
the case where the witness is testifying, as
for instance a statement to the police investigator. It
does not refer to statements which are made in the
same case, in which case such statements may be
used to impeach the witness without laying the
predicate. Thus a witness may be impeached by
an inconsistent statement made in his answer or
deposition taken in the same case without requiring
the witness to explain the inconsistency (See S4[a]
R23). If the deposition is however taken in another
case, the predicate should be laid.

Q.

How is a witness impeached by evidence of an
inconsistentstatement?

A.

Before a witness is impeached by evidence of an
inconsistent statement, the predicate must first
be laid.

Q.

How is the predicate laid?

A.

The laying of the predicate is done as follows
(WREA): (Asked 96 Bar 014).
951

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

o

If the statement is in writing, it must first be
shown to the witness before any question is
asked of him concerning the statement.

o

The statement must be related to him, with the
circumstances of the time and place and the
persons present.

o

He must be 2sked whether he made such
statement.

o

If so, he must
inconsistency.

be asked to ~xplain

the

Q.

If the predicate is not laid, what would be
the result?

A.

If the predicate is not laid, the impeachment is not
complete and the witness has not been impeached
effectively. (People v. Cortezano, 375 SCRA 95).

Q.

Is evidence of the good character of a witness
admissible?

A.

No, unless such character has been impeached.
(S54[c] R130). In such a case, the party presenting
the witness can rehabilitate the witness by
introducing evidence of his good character.

Q.

On cross-examination, Plaintiff's witness was
impeached by his prior inconsistentstatement.
On re-direct, may the Plaintiff introduce
evidence of his witness' good character?

A.

No. Evidence of a witness' good character is
admissible only if such witness' character has been
impeached. (S54[c] R130). Here the witness's
character was not impeached as what was used to

952

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

impeach him was not reputation evidence but an
inconsistent statement.
Q.

At the close of the trial, A's counsel marked for
identification and offered in evidence certified
copies of a Request for Admission and the
Reply thereto in a previous case between the
opposing party in the instant case, B, and a
third party, C. He offered the documents as
evidence that in the previous case, B had made
a judicial admission of a certain fact material to
the present case, the two-fold purpose thereof
being to impeach B's testimony in the present
case and to establish that certain fact. Should
the court admit the documents in evidence?
Explain. (84 Bar Q11 ).

A.

The court should not admit the document for the
purpose of proving the certain fact nor for
impeaching B's testimony.
Any admission under R26, whether express or
implied, is for the purpose of the pending action
only and shall not constitute an admission by him
for any other purpose nor may the same be used
against him in any other proceeding. (S3 R26).
Hence the reply to the request for admission may
not be admitted by the court as an admission to
prove the certain fact.
Nor may the reply to the request for admission
be used to impeach B's testimony. S3 R26 provides
that the admission thereunder may not be used
against the admitter in any other proceeding.
Hence even if A would lay the predicate for
impeachment using an inconsistent statement, the
prior admission cannot be used against B for S3

953

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

R26 states that "the same [may not] be used
against him in any other proceeding."171
Q.

May a party impeach his own witness?

A.

No. The general rule is that a party producing a
witness is not allowed to impeach the witness'
credibility. (813 R132). The basis for the rule is
that a party vouches for his witness' credibility.

Q.

When may a party impeach his own witness?
(UHA)

A.
1) UNWILLING OR HOSTILE WITNESS. If the
witness has been declared by the court as an
unwilling or hostile witness. A witness may be
considered as unwilling or hostile only if so
declared by the court upon an adequate showing
of his 2dverse interest, unjustified reluctance to
testify, and of his having misled the party into
calling him to the witness stand. (ARM).
2) ADVERSE-PARTY WITNESS. If the witness is
an adverse party or a director, officer, or
managing agent (DOM) of a corporation,
partnership, or association (CPA) which is an
adverse party.
Q.

Plaintiffcalled the Defendant as an adverse-party
witness. After the examination of the Defendant
had been concluded, the Plaintiff calls as his next
witness W who will testify that Defendant has a
reputation in their community of being a liar. May
the Defendant object to W's testimony?

171The
suggested answer of the UPLC that the documents may be used to
impeach B's testimony if the predicate is laid overlooks the preclusive tenor
of 83 R26.

954

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

A.

Yes. The unwilling or hostile witness or the adverseparty witness may be impeached by the party
presenting him in all respects as if he had been
called by the adverse party, except by evidence of
his bad character.?" (813 R132).

Q.

Plaintiff filed a case for collection of money
against the Defendant. During the trial, the
Defendant called the Plaintiff as an adverseparty witness. The Plaintiff was then crossexamined by his own counsel. The trial court
rendered a decision against the Defendant in
which it took into consideration the testimony
of the Plaintiff as an adverseparty witness both
on direct and on cross by his own counsel. The
Defendantcontends that it was error for the trial
court to do so, especially with regard to the
Plaintiff's testimony on cross by his own
counsel, because of the rule that a party who
calls to the stand an adverse party witness is
not bound by the latter's testimony. Is this
contention correct?

A.

No. A party who calls his adversary as a witness is
not bound by the latter's testimony only in the
sense that he may impeach the witness's testimony
as if he were called by the adverse party. It does
not mean however that such testimony may not be
given its proper weight, even as against the calling
party. (Gaw v. Chua, G.R. 160855, 16 April 2008).

Q.

Defendant's witness testified that she was
aboard a taxi when she saw the defendant's car
enter the intersection when the stoplight was
green. On cross-examination,may it be shown

172The
reason is that the party presenting the witness should have known
or investigated the witness' general reputation for honesty, truth, and integrity.

955

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

that she was actually aboard a bus rather
than a taxi?
A.

No. Under the Collateral Matter Rule, a witness
cannotbe impeachedby contradictoryevidenceon a
collateral matter. (ANTONIOR. BAUTISTA,BASIC
EVIDENCE101-103[2d ed.]). A collateralmatter is
a fact which has no independentprobativevalue.
The rationale for the rule is that the court's time
shouldnot be wastedon collateralmatters.
Here whether the witness was onboarda bus
or a taxi does not have any independentprobative
value or has no relevancyto prove or disproveany
issue in the action.

Q.

China Bank filed with the RTC a loan collection
case against Ever Electrical Mfg. Co. and Ng
Meng Tam, a surety to Ever's loan. Ng filed an
answer with affirmative defense of the nullity of
the suretyship contract. Ng moved for a
preliminary hearing on his affirmative defense
which was granted. After serving written
interrogatories on George Yap, China Bank's
account officer, and receiving Yap's answers
thereto, Ng applied for the issuance of a
subpoena duces tecum and ad testificandum
against George Yap. China Bank objected,
arguing that Yap cannot be compelled to testify
in court because Ng did not obtain and present
Yap's judicial affidavit pursuant to Section 5 of
the Judicial Affidavit Rule (JAR). Should China
Bank's objection be sustained?

A.

No. Section 5 of the JAR expresslyexcludesfrom
its application adverse party and hostile
witnesses. For the presentationof these types of
956

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

witnesses, the provisions on the Rules of Court
under the Revised Rules of Evidence and all other
correlative rules including the modes of deposition
and discovery rules shall apply. Here it is enough
for the party calling the adverse party witness to
serve beforehand written interrogatories pursuant
to 86 R25 and the case of Afu/ugencia v.
Metropolitan Bank & Trust Co., 715 SCRA 399
(2014), which was done in this case. (Ng Meng
Tam v. China Banking Corp., 5 August 2015).
Q.

In a case covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule
(JAR), the plaintiff's witness (Mr. Villafuerte)
was cross-examinedby the defense counsel of
the insurer on whether he had submitted proofs
of purchase of the raw materials. The witness
answered yes and he mentioned purchase
orders, sales invoices, and delivery receipts
(questioneddocuments).
During the re-direct examination of Mr.
Villafuerte plaintiff's counsel produced the
QuestionedDocumentsin open court and asked
Mr. Villafuerte to identify those documents,
seeking to introduce and mark them as exhibits.
Respondents immediately objected in open
court to the introduction and presentationof the
Questioned Documents on the grounds that
they were neither touched upon nor covered by
the witness' cross-examination, and that the
same were being introduced for the first time at
this late stage of proceeding,without giving the
parties opportunity to verify their relevanceand
authenticity. They argued that since these
documents were not presented, identified,
marked, and even compared with the originals
during the Pre-TrialConference,they should be
957

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

excluded pursuant to the Guidelines on
Pre-Trial and JA Rule. Should the objection
be sustained?
A.

No. The matter regarding the questioned documents
was brought about during the cross-examination by
defense counsel of Mr. Villafuerte. Hence the
introduction of the questioned documents was proper
during the re-direct of Mr. Villafuerte.
Moreover as can be gleaned from the Pre-Trial
Order, both parties reserved the right to present
additional evidence. Such a reservation is
tantamount to a waiver of the application of Secs. 2
and 10 of the JAR. (Lara's Gift & Decors Inc. v. PNB
General Insurers, 24 January 2018, Velasco, J.).

Q.

Give the
rule regarding
separation of witnesses.

exclusion

and

A.

The court, motu proprio or upon motion, shall order
witnesses excluded so that they cannot hear the
testimony of other witnesses. This rule does not
authorize exclusion of (a) a party who is a natural
person, (b) a duly designated representative of a
juridical entity which is a party to the case, (c) a
person whose presence is essential to the
presentation of the party's cause, or (d) a person
authorized by a statute to be present.
The court may also cause witnesses to be kept
separate and to be prevented from conversing with
one another, directly or through intermediaries, until
all shall have been examined. (S15 R132, as
amended by the 2020 Rules on Evidence).

958

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

Give an example of S15(c) R132.

A.

The category contemplates such persons as an
agent who handled the transaction being litigated or
an expert needed to advise counsel in the
management of the litigation. (Advisory notes on
the 2019 FRE).

Q.

Respondent sued Petitioner corporation for
damages for installing defective floor tiles in
her house. Petitioner presented Kenneth Sy as
its witness. Stephen Sy was in the courtroom
and he listened to Kenneth's testimony. When
Petitioner was about to present Stephen as its
next witness, Respondent's counsel objected to
the presentationinvoking 515 R132 on exclusion
and separation of witnesses. May the trial court
disallow the presentation of Stephen as a
witness on the ground that he heard the
testimony of Kenneth?

A.

No. Without any prior order or at least a motion for
exclusion from any of the parties, a court cannot
simply allow or disallow the presentationof a witness
solely on the ground that the latter heard the
testimony of another witness. It is the responsibility
of respondent'scounsel to protect the interest of his
client during the presentation of other witnesses. If
respondent actually believed that Kenneth's
testimony would greatly affect that of Stephen's,
then respondent'scounsel was clearly remiss in his
duty to protect the interest of his client when he did
not raise the issue of the exclusion of the witness
Stephen in a timely manner. (Design Sources
International v. Eristingcol, 19 February2014).

959

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

May a witness be allowed to refresh his memory
respecting a fact?

A.

Yes, a witness may be allowed to refresh his
memory respecting a fact by a writing or record
which is written or recorded by the witness or under
his direction at a time when the facts were fresh in
his memory and he knew that the fact was correctly
written or recorded. (RFK) (816 R132). Here the
witness has momentarily forgotten the fact but he
can remember it if his memory is refreshed or
jogged by the writing or record. This procedure of
refreshing the witness' memory is known as
"present memory refreshed."

Q.

May the writing or record used to refresh the
witness' memory be offered in evidence?

A.

No. The writing or record used to refresh a witness'
memory has no independent evidential value and
cannot be offered in evidence. (Canque v. CA, 305
8CRA 579 [1999]). However the writing or record
must be produced and may be inspected by the
adverse party, who may cross-examinethe witness
upon it and may read it in evidence. (816 R132).
If the writing or record however qualifies as an
independent documentary evidence itself and not
something used merely to refresh the witness's
memory, as in the case of a business record, then
the proponent may introduce it as documentary
evidence. The writing or record may be examined
by the adverse party who can use it to crossexamine the witness and read it in evidence.

960

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

What if the witness retains no recollection of
the particular facts. May he testify from the
writing or record mentioned in the first
sentenceof 516 R132?

A.

Yes, provided he is able to swear that the writing or
the record correctly stated the transaction when made
(cstm). The writing or the record however must be
received with caution. The writing or record is also
known as "past recollection recorded." (PRR).

Q.

X states on direct examination that he once
knew the facts being asked but he cannot recall
them now. When handed a written record of the
facts he testifies that the facts are correctly
stated, but that he has never seen the writing
before. Is the writing admissible as past
recollection recorded? Explain. (96 Bar Q14[31).

A.

No, the writing is not admissible as past recollection
recorded.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the writing or
record must be written or recorded by or under the
direction of the witness testifying therefrom.
Here X testified that he has never seen the
writing before. Thus it is apparent that the same
was not written by him or under his direction.
Hence the writing is not admissible.

Note: The fact that the record was not written by X
would also make the same hearsay.
Q.

Must the writing or record used to refresh the
witness' memorycomply with the best evidence
rule? How about the writing or record which
records past recollection?
961

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

The writing or record which is used to refresh a
witness's memory need not comply with the best
evidence rule since it does not have any
independent evidential value. On the other hand
the record or writing recording past recollection
should comply with the best evidence rule since it is
being offered as proof of its contents.

Live-link TV testimony of a child witness
Q.

When may the live-link TV testimony of a child
witness be taken?

A.

The prosecutor, counsel or guardian ad litem may
apply for an order that the testimony of the child be
taken in a room outside the courtroom and be
televised to the courtroom by live-link TV on the
ground that there is substantial likelihood that the
child would suffer trauma from testifying in the
presence of the accused, his counsel or the
prosecutor as the case may be, which trauma
would impair the completeness or truth of the
testimony. Court may motu proprio hear and
determine, with notice to the parties, the need for
live-link TV testimony. The judge may question the
child in camera about his feelings on t~stifying. in
the courtroom but not about the issues at trial.
(S25 RECW)

Videotaped depositionof child witness
Q.

When may the videotaped deposition of a child
witness be taken?

A.

The prosecutor, counsel, or guardian ad litem may
apply for an order that a deposition be taken of the
child's testimony and that it be recorded and

962

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

preserved on videotape. If the judge finds that the
child will not be able to testify in open court during
the trial, it shall issue the order.
Q.

Who shall preside at the videotaped deposition
of the child?

A.

The judge shall preside
deposition of the child.

Q.

When shall objections to deposition testimony
or evidence be made?

A.

Objections to deposition testimony or evidence shall
be stated and shall be ruled upon at the time of the
taking of the deposition.

Q.

May the accused cross-examine
during the deposition?

A.

Yes. The rights of the accused during trial,
especially the right to counsel and to confront and
cross-examine the child, shall not be violated
during the deposition.

Q.

May the court admit the videotaped deposition
in lieu of the child witness's testimony?

A.

No. The exceptions would be if at the time of the
trial the court finds that the child is unable to testify
because: (1) there is substantial likelihood that the
child would suffer trauma from testifying in the
presence of the accused, his counsel or the
prosecutor as the case may be, which trauma
would impair the completeness or truth of the
testimony; or (2) of any reason under S4(c) R23. In
these cases, the court may admit the videotaped
deposition in lieu of his testimony. (S27 RECW).

963

at

the

videotaped

the

child

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Distinguish deposition pending trial under Rule
23 from videotaped deposition of a child
witness under the RECW.

A
DEPOSITION PENDING
TRIAL

VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION
OF CHILD WITNESS

UNDER RULE 23
Civil Cases.

Criminal Cases.

Generally court permission
not required.

Court permission required as
order should be applied for.

No ground required other
than deposition is relevant
and does not cover privileged
matter.

Ground is if the judge finds
that the child will not be able
to testify in open court during
the trial.

Presided over by officers
mentioned in R23.

The judge trying the case
shall preside over the
deposition takinq.

Objections made during the
deposition taking are not
ruled upon but merely noted
by the officer. As a general
rule, objections not made
during the deposition taking
are not waived and may be
raised when deposition is
offered in evidence.

Objections to deposition
testimony or evidence shall
be stated and shall be ruled
upon at the time of the taking
of the deposition.

Use of deposition during trial
aoverned bv S4 R23.

Use of deposition during trial
aoverned by 827 RECW.

964

J9JC9B0M

AUTHENTICATION AND
PROOF OF DOCUMENTS
Authenticationin general
Q.

What is authentication?

A.

Authentication is the process of establishing that
evidence is what it purports to be, in other words,
that it is genuine. In the case of private documents,
authentication means proving the due execution
and authenticity of a document which is offered as
authentic. (820 R132).

Q.

Should a document be authenticated before it
may be received in evidence?

A.

We have to distinguish. Private documents as a rule
must be authenticated before they may be received
in evidence. (820 R132). Public documents however
may be received in evidence without the need for
authentication. Authentication is not required of
public documents because they are presumed
authentic by virtue of their nature. The presumption
may be overthrown.

Q.

What is a private document?

A.

A private document is a document other than a
public document. (819 R132).

Q.

How is a private document authenticated?

A.

Before a private document offered as authentic is
received in evidence it should first be authenticated,
that is, its due execution and authenticity should be
proved by (a) anyone who saw the document
executed or written, (b) evidence of the genuineness

965

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of the signature or handwriting of the maker, or (c)
other evidence showing its due execution and
authenticity. (8GD). (820 R132 as amended by the
2020 Rules on Evidence). 820(c) was added in the
2020 Rules on Evidence and recognizes among
others the doctrine of authentication by circumstantial
evidence as well as other means of authentication
provided by other evidentiary rules, such as the
Rule on Electronic Evidence (REE).
Q.

How is the genuineness
handwritingproved?

of

a

person's

A.

The genuineness of a person's handwriting may be
proved by: (WC)
1) A witness who has seen the person write.
What is written here is a document other than
the one sought to be authenticated. If what the
witness saw is the execution or writing of the
document, the same is authenticated under
820(a) R132.
2) Or has seen writing purporting to be his upon
which the witness has acted or been charged,
and has thus acquired knowledge of the
handwriting of such person. E.g. a signed
instruction for a person to make payment to a
particular agent and the statement of account
thereafter shows that the payment was credited.
3) A comparison, made by the witness or the court,
with writings admitted or treated as genuine by
the adverse party or proved to be genuine to the
satisfaction of the judge. (822 R132).

966

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
PresentationOf Evidence

Q.

What is an ancient document? Does it need to
be authenticated?

A.

An ancient document is a private document which is
more than 30 years old, is produced from a custody
in which it would naturally be found if genuine, and
is unblemished by any alteration or suspicious
circumstance. It does not need to be authenticated.
(S21 R132).

Q.

May a newspaper article dated 9 June 1901,
producedfrom the archives of the newspaper,be
offered to prove that the Dallas County
Courthousewas damagedby fire in 9 June 1901?

A.

Yes. Applying the rationale for the exception from
authentication of ancient documents, the newspaper
article may be admitted in evidence over a hearsay
objection. (See Dallas County v. Commercial Union
Assurance Co 286 F.2d 388 [5th Cir. 19611). Under
FRE 803(16), an ancient document is excepted
from the hearsay rule.

Q.

May a private document be authenticated by
circumstantial evidence?

A.

Yes. Where there is no eyewitness to the execution
or writing of a private document or no evidence
concerning the genuineness of the maker's signature
or handwriting can be obtained, the document may
still be authenticated using circumstantial evidence.

Examples:
1) Self-authenticated documents. Where the
facts in the writing could only have been known by
the writer. For instance the use of code terms likely
to be known only by the participants in the

967

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

underlying events, or by other revealing contents,
such as dates, amounts, etc., known only to the
participants in the events. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC EVIDENCE 149 [2004 ed.]).
2) Reply-authenticated documents. Where the
reply of the adverse party refers to and affirms the
sending to him and his receipt of the letter in
question, a copy of which the proponent is offering
in evidence.
3) Reply-letter rule. Where a reply to a letter
indicates that the one writing the reply knew the tenor
of the letter, the reply is deemed authenticated.
Authentication by circumstantial evidence is
now expressly recognized in the 2020 Rules on
Evidence under S20(c) R132.
Q.

Former President Joseph Estrada argued that
the Supreme Court relied upon the Philippine
Daily Inquirer's excerpts from the Angara Diary
which documentary evidence however was not
authenticated. May the Supreme Court rely
upon the excerpts even if these were not
authenticated?

A.

Yes. The Supreme Court said that "a party who does
not deny the genuineness of a preferred instrument
may not object that it was not properly identified
before it was received in evidence." Estrada did not
object to the admissibility of the Angara Diary despite
opportunity to do so. (Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. Nos.
146710-15, 15 April 2001 ).

968

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

How is a private electronic document authenticated?

A.

Before any private electronic document offered as
authentic is received in evidence, its authenticity must
be proved by any of the following means: (DSR)
(a) Evidence that it had been digitally signed.
(b) Appropriate security procedures or devices as
may be authorized by law or rules have been
applied to the document, or
(c) Other evidence showing its reliability and
integrity to the satisfaction of the judge. (82
R5, REE).

Q.

What are public documents?

A.

Public Documents consist of: (PATO)
a) OFFICIAL RECORDS. Written official acts or
records of official acts of the sovereign
authority, official bodies and tribunals, and
public officers, whether of the Philippines or of a
foreign country.
b) Acknowledged documents (notarial documents),
except wills.
c) Documents that are considered public documents
under treaties and conventions which are in
force between the Philippines and the country of
source.173
d) Public records of private documents required by
law to be entered therein. (819 R132).

Subsection (c) was added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

173

969

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Are affidavits and sworn certifications public
documents?

A.

Affidavits and sworn certifications are not public
documents because they do not contain an
acknowledgement but a jurat. (See Cequena v.
4
Bolante, 330 SCRA 216).1
A ju rat is applicable to
affidavits, certifications, or other statements of fact,
while an acknowledgement is applicable to acts or
contracts wherein the person states before the
notary public that he has freely and voluntarily
executed the same.

Q.

Does the non-submission of a notarial report
remove the public nature of a acknowledged
document or instrument?

A.

No. (Aboitiz v. Po, 5 June 2017, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Is a return of service of summons executed by a
foreign sheriff admissible to prove the fact of
service even without presenting in court the
foreign sheriff?

A.

It is submitted that the return of service is
admissible to prove the fact of service even without
presenting the foreign sheriff.
Although S44 R130 refers to "[e]ntries in
official records made in the performance of his duty
by a public officer of the Philippines," (italics
supplied), this provision should be read in
conjunction with S19(a) R132 and S23 R132.
S19(a) R132 classifies as public documents, the
written official acts or records of the official acts of

174
In Republic v. Marcos-Manotoc, G.R. No. 171701, 8 February 2012, it
was stated that "affidavits may be considered as public documents if they are
acknowledged before a notary public." (Italics supplied). The statement is not
altogether correct since an affidavit contains not an acknowledgment but a jurat.

970

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

public officers, whether of the Philippines or of a
foreign country. Under S23 R132, "[d]ocuments
consisting of entries in public records made in the
performance of a duty by a public officer are prima
facie evidence of the facts therein stated."
Hence the return of service may be presented
as prima facie evidence of the fact of service even
without presenting the foreign sheriff. The
requirements of proof of official record under S24
R132 must of course be followed.
Q.

Give an example of S19(c) R132.

A.

Under the Apostille Convention on Authentication of
Documents to which the Philippines is a signatory,
where a foreign country which is a signatory to the
conventionhas affixed an apostille175 to a document,
that document need no longer be authenticated by
a Philippine consular officer in order to be received
in evidence in the Philippines.

Q.

What is the evidential nature of public documents?

A.

Documents consisting of entries in public records
made in the performance of a duty by a public
officer are prima facie evidence of the facts therein
stated. All other public documents are evidence,
even against a third person, of the fact which gave
rise to their execution and of the date of the latter.
(S23 R132).

175A
certification under the terms of the convention. If the convention
applies between two countries, such an apostille is sufficient to certify a
document's validity, and removes the need for double-certification, by the
originating country and then by the receiving country.

971

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Jose Marcial Ochoa died in an accident while
onboard a taxi cab owned and operated by G &
S Transport. His heirs sued G & S for damages.
Introduced in evidence of lost income was a
certification issued by the HRD chief of Jose's
employer,
the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), regarding
Jose's income. This was objected to on the
ground that the certification was not authenticated
and identified in court by its signatory and that
the income stated therein was not supported by
receipts or other evidence. Should the objection
be sustained?

A.

No. Under S19(a) R132, records of official acts of
public officers whether of the Philippines or of a
foreign country are considered as public records.
Here the USAID is an official government
agency of the USA and thus its HRD chief is a
public officer. Hence the certification is a public
document under S19(a) R132 and thus no longer
needs to be authenticated.
The certification as to income does not need to
be supported by other evidence for it is prima facie
evidence of the facts stated therein pursuantto 823
R132. (Heirs of Ochoa v. G & S Transport Corp.,
16 July 2012).

Q.

Prosecution for homicide of petitioner for
shooting to death the victim. The prosecution
presented a police captain who identified in
court a chemistry report on a paraffin test
showing the presence of gunpowder residue on
the petitioner's right hand. The petitioner argued
that the chemistry report should not have been

972

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

admitted in evidence since the forensic chemist
who actually conducted the paraffin test on the
petitioner was not presented in court. Was the
petitioner's argument correct?
A.

No. The chemistry report showing a positive result
of the paraffin test is a public document under
S19(a) R132. As a public document, the rule on
authentication does not apply. It is admissible in
evidence without further proof of its due execution
and genuineness; the person who made the report
need not be presented in court to identify, describe
and testify how the report was conducted.
Moreover, documents consisting of entries in public
records made in the performance of a duty by a
public officer are prima facie evidence of the facts
stated therein pursuant to 823 R132. ~Kummer v.
6
People, 11 September 2013, Brion, J. ).1

Q.

In 2009, petitioner filed with the RTC a petition
under R108 to correct a clerical or typographical
error in his sex, which was indicated in his birth
certificate as "female." He presented a medical
certificate by a government physician that he
was "phenotypicallymale." The RTC granted
the petition. On appeal, the Republic contends
that it was errot to admit the medical certificate
since the physician was not presented in court
in order that his qualifications may be
established and so that he may identify and
authenticate the medical certificate. Is the
Republic's contention correct?

176Take
note however of 813 of A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014, re
accused who are under preventive detention, which provides that the personal
appearance in court of the government medical, chemical, or laboratory expert
witness who prepared the report shall be unnecessary unless demanded by the
accused for the purpose of cross-examination. (Italics supplied).

973

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. The medical certificate is a public document,
the same. having been issued by a public officer in
the performance of official duty; as such, it
constitutes prima facie evidence of the facts therein
stated. Under S23 R132, "[d]ocuments consisting of
entries in public records made in the performance
of a duty by a public officer are prima facie
evidence of the facts therein stated."
There was therefore no need to further identify
and authenticate the medical certificate. "A public
document, by virtue of its official or sovereign
character, or because it has been acknowledged
before a notary public (except a notarial will) or a
competent public official with the formalities required
by law, or because it is a public record of a private
writing authorized by law, is self-authenticating and
requires no further authentication in order to be
presented as evidence in court." (Republic v. Unabia,
11 Feb 2019, Del Castillo, J.).

Q.

Diamond Subdivision is a residential subdivision
in Balibago, Angeles City, Pampanga with
several commercial establishments operating
within it. These establishments include beer
houses, karaoke bars, night clubs, and other
drinking joints.
Because of these, patrons, customers, and
many other people freely come in and out of
Diamond Subdivision. Such unrestricted access
to the subdivision, however, also exposed its
residents to incidents of robbery, akyat-bahay,
prostitution, rape, loud music, and noise lasting
until the wee morning hours.

974

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Diamond Homeowners &
Resident
Association (Diamond Homeowners), the
legitimate homeowners'associationof Diamond
Subdivision, sought to address the residents'
peace and security issues by raising their
concerns to the AngelesCity Council.
On 24 February 2003, the Angeles City
Council issued an ordinance reclassifying
Diamond Subdivision as exclusively residential
and prohibited the further establishment and
operation of any business except for those
already existing. The whereas clauses of the
ordinance state the security and safety
concerns of the subdivision which gave rise to
the passageof the ordinance. Is the ordinance
prima facie evidenceof such concerns?
A.

Yes. The city ordinance is a public document. Under
S19(a) R132, written official acts of the sovereign
authority, official bodies and tribunals, and public
officers of the Philippines are public documents.
Hence it is prima facie evidenceof securityand safety
concerns within subdivision. (S23 R132). (Kwong
Mgt. Inc. v. Diamond Homeowners Assoc. Inc., 10
June 2019, Leanen, J.).

Q.

Dizon filed an action for specific performance
against Matti in order to enforce a notarized
deed of sale where Matti was the purported
seller of a parcel of land to Dizon. Matti in her
answer denied having ever met Dizon and
signing the deed of sale. Matti offered in
evidence her passport which showed that she
was in London at the purported time she signed
the deed of sale. Dizon countered that the

975

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

acknowledged deed of sale was a public
document and thus presumed to be genuine and
duly executed. Is Dizon's contention correct?

A.

No. The passport which is a public document, the
issuance thereof being an official act of the DF A and
containing official stamps made by the Bureau of
Immigration, is clear and convincing evidence to
overthrow the presumption of genuiness and due
execution of a notarized document. If Matti was in
London at the alleged date of the execution of the
deed of sale, it is clear that her signature was forged.
(Dizon v. Matti, 27 March 2019, Caguioa, J.).

Q.

Yasuo filed a petition for declaration of nullity of
his marriage with Felisa on the ground that she
had a prior subsisting marriage at the. time of
their marriage. Yasuo presented in evidence a
certification from the NSO that Felisa has two
marriages, one with Raymond in 1994 and the
other with Yasuo in 2002. The trial court
dismissedthe petition on the grQund thatYasuo"
did not present as a witness the NSO records
custodian to certify to the authencity and due
execution of the certification. Was the presentation
of the NSO records custodian as a witness
during the trial necessary?

A.

No. The NSO certification is a public document
pursuant to Article 410 of the Civil Code which
provides that the books making up the civil register
and all documents relating thereto are public
documents and shall be prima facie proof of the
facts therein. Hence there was no need to present
the records custodian of the NSO to testify on their
authenticity and due execution. (lwasawa v.
Gang an, 11 September 2013, Villarama, J. ).

976

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

Is an acknowledged document evidence of the
facts expressed therein?

A.

There are some holdings which state that a notarial
(acknowledged) document is evidence of the facts
expressed therein.177 Such a holding is imprecise
since an acknowledgement document refers to the
execution of an act or contract. In an issue
involving a written act or contract, the fact to be
proved is the existence or the execution of the act
or contract itself and resultantly of the terms
thereof, but not the "truth" of any matter expressed
therein. Hence while an acknowledgeddocument is
proof of the contents thereof, it is not technically
speaking evidence of the facts stated therein for an
instrument or a deed does not in the first place
assert facts.

Q.

How is an official record proved?

A.

An official record (the public document referred to in
S19[a] R132) may be evidenced by:
1)

Official publication thereof, or

2)

Copy attested by the officer having the legal
custody of the record or by his deputy and
accompanied, if the record is not kept in the
Philippines, with a certificate that such officer
has the custody.

If the office in which the record is kept is in a
foreign country, which is a contracting party to a
treaty or convention to which the Philippines is also
a party, or considered a public document under
such treaty or convention pursuant to paragraph (c)
177For
instance Gutierrez v. Mendoza-Plaza, 4 December 2009.
Lozano v. Fernandez, 18 February 2019.

977

Also

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

of Section 19 hereof, the certificate or its equivalent
shall be in the form prescribed by such treaty or
convention subject to reciprocity granted to public
documents originating from the Philippines.178
For documents originating from a foreign
country which is not a contracting party to a treaty
or convention referred to in the next preceding
sentence, the certificate may be made by a
secretary of the embassy or legation, consul
general, consul, vice-consul, or consular agent or
by any officer in the foreign service of the
Philippines stationed in the foreign country in which
the record is kept, and authenticated by the seal of
his or her office.
A document that is accompanied by a
certificate or its equivalent may be presented in
evidence without further proof, the certificate or its
equivalent being prima facie evidence of the due
execution and genuineness of the document
involved. The certificate shall not be required when
a treaty or convention between a foreign country
and the Philippines has abolished the requirement,
or has exempted the document itself from this
formality. (24a)
Q.

Petitioner Redante first married Maria Socorro in
1984. He then contracted a second marriage with
Fe Aguila, the private complainant, in 1998.
Charged with bigamy, Petitioner presented in
evidence a Certificate of Divorce allegedly issued
by the registrar of the Supreme Court of British
Columbia, Canada, on 14 January 2008 certifying
that Petitioner and Maria Socorro were divorced
See

178

the Apostille
mentioned under 819 R132.

Convention on

978

Authentication

of Documents

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

in Canada in 1988. Is the certificatesufficient to
absolvePetitionerfrom liability?
A.

No. First, the certificate of divorce is not the divorce
decree required by the rules and jurisprudence. The
divorce decree required to prove the fact of divorce
is the judgment itself as rendered by the foreign
court and not a mere certification. Second,
assuming the certificate of divorce may be
considered as the divorce decree, it was not
accompanied by a certification issued by the proper
Philippine diplomatic or consular officer stationed in
Canada, as required under S24 R132. Lastly, no
copy of the alleged Canadian law was presented by
the defense. Thus, it could not be reasonably
determined whether the subject divorce decree was
in accord with Maria Socorro's national law.
Further, since neither the divorce decree nor
the alleged Canadian law was satisfactorily
demonstrated, the type of divorce supposedly
secured by Maria Socorro -whether an absolute
divorce which terminates the marriage or a limited
divorce which merely suspends it -and whether such
divorce capacitated her to remarry could not also be
ascertained. As such, Redante failed to prove his
defense that he had the capacity to remarry when he
contracted a subsequent marriage to Fe. His liability
for bigamy is therefore beyond question. (Sarto v.
People, 28 February 2018, Martires, J.).

Q.

The corporate auditor of the Commission on
Audit (COA) issued a certification that the COA
had concurred in the engagement of a private
lawyer by the Home Development Mutual Fund
(HDMF). No copy of the COA concurrence was

979

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

attached to the certification. Is the certification
proof of the COA's concurrence?

A.

No. First, the certification did not comply with 825
which states that the attestation must state that the
copy is a correct copy of the original, the reason
being that no copy of the concurrence was attached
to the certification Second, even if we were to
consider the certification as a copy of the original,
there was no showing that the corporate auditor
was the legal custodian of the COA records who
was authorized to make the attestation under 824
& 25 R132. (HDMF v. Sagun, 31 July 2018,
Bersamin, J.).

Q.

Petitioner filed a petition for recognition of a
Japanese Divorce Decree. In order to prove the
Japanese law on divorce, she offered a
photocopy of excerpts from the Civil Code of
Japan which was stamped "LIBRARY, EMBASSY
OF JAPAN." Is the photocopy proof of the
Japanese divorce law?

A.

No. The certification must comply with S24 & 25
R132. Here the certification did not comply with
824 R 132 since the copy was not attested by the
officer having the legal custody of the record and
accompanied with a certificate that such officer has
the custody. Nor did it comply with 825 R132 since
there was no attestation that the copy is a correct
copy of the original. (Nul/ada v. Ito, 23 January
2019, Reyes, J.)

Q.

Nustad, a Norwegian citizen and resident, sued
Tujan-Militantefor delivery of certificatesof title
in the name of Nustad which the suit alleged
defendant was unlawfully withholding from

980

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Nustad. Nustad was represented by Atty. Lucila,
whom Nustad had authorized to bring suit in
her behalf by way of an SPA executed in
Norway and acknowledged before a notary
public therein. Tujan-Militante argued that it was
improper for the court to take into account the
SPA on the ground that it was not certified by a
foreign service officer as required under 524
R132. Is Tujan-Militante's challenge meritorious?

A.

No. S24 R132 (proof of official record) applies only
to S19(a) not to (b) and (c) of R132. Hence an SPA
notarized abroad does not need a consular
certification for it to be admitted in evidence.
(Tujan-Militante v. Nustad, 19 June 2017, Tijam, J.)

Q.

How is a public record of a private document
proved?

A.

An authorized public record of a private document
may be proved by:
1)

Original record, or

2)

Copy attested by the legal custodian of the
record, with an appropriate certificate that such
officer has the custody. (S27 R 132).

Q.

What must the attestation of a copy state?

A.

Whenever a copy of a document or record is
attested for the purpose of evidence, the attestation
must state, in substance, that the copy is a correct
copy of the original, or a specific part thereof, as
the case may be. The attestation must be under the
official seal of the attesting officer, if there be any,
or if he be the clerk of a court having a seal, under
the seal of such court. (S25 R132).
981

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Respondent offered in evidence Exhibit H, a
photocopy of a deed of sale. On the photocopy
is a stamped notation signed by an assessment
officer in the local assessor's office which
states that the photocopy is a "certified true
xerox copy." The petitionerobjected to the offer
on the ground that it violates the best evidence
rule but the trial court overruled the objection
and admitted the photocopy. Was the admission
of the photocopyin evidence proper?

A.

No, on two grounds.
First the attestation made by the assessment
officer is defective for it did not state "that the copy
is a correct copy of the original." (See 825 R132).
Second the assessor's office is not the official
repository of original notarized deeds of sale and
could not have been the legal custodian
contemplated in 827 R132. It is the notary public or
the proper court that has custody of his notarial
register that could have produced the original or a
certified true copy thereof. (Heirs of Gabatan v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 150206, 13 March 2009).

Q.

May a public record be removed from the office
in which it is kept?

A.

No, except upon order of a court where the
inspection of the record is essential to the just
determination of a pending case. (826 R132).

Q.

How is the lack of an official record proved?

A.

The lack of an official record is proved by a written
statement signed by an officer having the custody
of an official record or his deputy that after diligent
search, no record or entry of a specified tenor is

982

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

found to exist in the records of his office,
accompanied by a certificate that such officer has
the custody of official records. (S28 R 132).
Q.

Petitioner Syed Azhar Abbas (Syed) filed a
petition for the declaration of nullity of his
marriage to Gloria Goo Abbas (Gloria) with the
RTC of Pasay City. Syed alleged the absence of
a marriage license as a ground for the
annulment of his marriage to Gloria. In the
Marriage Contrace of Gloria and Syed, it is
stated that Marriage License No. 9969967,
issued at Carmona, Cavite on January 8, 1993,
was presented to the solemnizing officer. Syed
offered in evidence the certification of the
Municipal Civil Registrar to the effect that the
marriage license number appearing in the
marriage contract he submitted, Marriage License
No. 9969967,was the number of another marriage
license issued to a certain Arlindo Getalado and
Myra Mabilangan. Said certification
reads
as follows:
11 July 2003
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
This is to certify as per Registry Records of
Marriage License filed in this office, Marriage
License No. 9969967 was issued in favor of MR.
ARLINDO GETALADO
and
MISS MYRA
MABILANGAN on January 19, 1993.
No Marriage License appear [sic] to have been
issued to MR. SYED AZHAR ABBAS and MISS
GLORIA F. GOO on January 8, 1993. This
certification is being issued to Mr. Syed Azhar Abbas
for whatever legal purpose or intents it may serve.
983

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

On cross-examination,Syed testified that
Gloria had filed bigamy cases against him in
2001 and 2002, and that he had gone to the
Municipal Civil Registrarof Carmona,Cavite to
get certification on whether or not there was a
marriage license on advice of his counsel. The
RTC, relying upon the certification, nullified the
marriage but on appeal the Court of Appeals
reversed, stating that the certification of the
Municipal Civil Registrar failed to categorically
state that a diligent search for the marriage
license of Gloria and Syed was conducted
as required by 528 R132 and thus held that
said certification could not be accorded
probative value.Wasthe certificationof the MCR
adequate to prove the non-issuance of the
marriagelicense?
A.

Yes, the certification of the Local Civil Registrar that
their office had no record of a marriage license was
adequate to prove the non-issuance of said license.
The presumed validity of the marriage of the parties
had been overcome, and thus it became the burden of
the party alleging a valid marriage to prove that the
marriage was valid, and that the required marriage
license had been secured. The certification need not
state that a diligent search was made because of the
presumption that official duty has been regularly
performed. Besides the fact that the MCR stated that
license no. 9969967 was issued to another couple
shows that she undertook a diligent search. The fact
that the names in said license do not correspond to
those of Gloria and Syed does not overturn the
presumption that the registrar conducted a diligent
search of the records of her office. (Abbas v. Abbas,
30 January 2013, Velasco, J.).

984

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

Upon complaint of Alice, Norberto was charged
with bigamy committed by contracting a second
marriage with Alice while his first marriage with
Gina was subsisting. Norberto argues that the
first element of bigamy is absent in this case.
He presents as evidence a Certification from the
Office of the Civil Registrar of Imus, Cavite,
which states that the Office has no record of the
marriage license allegedly issued in his favor
and his first wife, Gina. Petitioner presents a
Certification from the Office of the Civil
Registrar of Imus, Cavite, which states:
[A]fter a diligent search on the files of
Registry Book on Application for Marriage
Licenseand LicenseIssuanceavailablein this
office, no recordcould be found on the alleged
issuanceof this office of MarriageLicenseNo.
8683519 in favor of MR. NORBERTOA.
VITANGCOL
and MS. GINAM. GAERLANdated
July 17, 1987.
He argues that with no proof of existence of
an essential requisite of marriage-the marriage
license-the prosecution fails to establish the
legality of his first marriage. Does the
Certification from the Office of the Civil Registrar
prove that no marriage license was issued in
favor of Norberto Vitangcol and Gina Gaerlan?

A.

No. This Certification does not prove that petitioner's
first marriage was solemnized without a marriage
license. It does not categorically state that Marriage
License No. 8683519 does not exist.
This case should be distinguished from Republic
v. Court of Appeals, 236 SCRA 257 (1994). Castro
was originally an action for the declaration of nullity of

985

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

a marriage. As part of its evidence, the plaintiff
presented a certification that states that the marriage
license "cannot be located as said license ... does
not appear from [the local civil registrar's] records."
The Supreme Court held that "[t]he certification ...
enjoys probative value, [the local civil registrar] being
the officer charged under the law to keep a record of
all data relative to the issuance of a marriage license."
The Supreme Court further said that "[u]naccompanied
by any circumstance of suspicion and pursuant to
Section 29, Rule 132 of the Rules of Court, a
certificate of 'due search and inability to find'
sufficiently proved that [the local civil registrar]
did not issue [a] marriage license . . . to the
contracting parties."
The circumstances in Castro and in this case
are different. Castro involved a civil case for
declaration of nullity of marriage that does not
involve the possible loss of liberty. The certification
in Castro was unaccompanied by any circumstance
of suspicion, there being no prosecution for bigamy
involved. On the other hand, the present case
involves a criminal prosecution for bigamy. This is a
circumstance of suspicion, the Certification having
been issued to Norberto for him to evade conviction
for bigamy. ~Vitangcol v. People, 13 January 2016,
Leanen, J.).1 9

179Vitangcol

may be distinguished from Abbas v. Abbas, 30 January 2013,
in that the former involved a criminal case for bigamy while Abbas involved a civil
action for nullification of marriage. It is also submitted that the pronouncement in
Vitangco/ is only obiter. The ratio decidendi of Vitangco/ is the settled doctrine
that a person who contracts a second marriage without a judicial decree of nullity
of the first marriage is guilty of bigamy, even if the first marriage really turns out
to be void.

986

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

Petitioner Raquel Kho filed a petition for
declaration of nullity of his marriage with
respondent Veronica Borata. Petitioner was
able to present a certification issued by the
Municipal Civil Registrar of Arteche, Eastern
Samar, attesting that the Office of the Local
Civil Registrar "has no record nor copy of any
marriage license ever issued in favor of Raquel
G. Kho [petitioner] and Veronica M. Borata
[respondent]whose marriage was celebrated on
June 1, 1972." Is this adequate proof that no
license was issued regarding the marriage of
Raquel and Veronica?

A.

Yes. It is not required that the certification
categorically state that the license does not exist in
the said office despite diligent search. On the.basis
of the certification, the presumed validity of the
marriage of petitioner and respondent has been
overcome and it becomes the burden of respondent
to prove that their marriage is valid as it is she who
alleges such validity. The marriage certificate
presented by respondent does not prove the
validity of the marriage since it did not contain any
entry regarding a marriage license. (Kho v.
Republic, 1 June 2016, Peralta, J.).

Q.

May a judicial recordbe impeached? If so, how?

A.

Yes a judicial record may be impeached by
evidence of (JCF): (a) want of jurisdiction in the
court or judicial officer, (b) collusion between the
parties, or (c) fraud in the party offering the record,
in respect of the proceedings. (829 R132).

987

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

How are acknowledged
proved?

(notarial) documents

A.

Every instrument duly acknowledged or proved and
certified as provided by law, may be presented in
evidence without further proof, the certificate of
acknowledgment being prima facie evidence of
their execution. (830 R132).

Q.

Is an instrument or document acknowledged
and authenticated
in a foreign country
considered authentic in the Philippines?

A.

Yes, provided there has been compliance with the
requirements of Public Act No. 2103, which basically
provides that the acknowledgment must be made
before the Philippine embassy or consul or before a
notary public or officer duly authorized by the law of
the foreign country to take acknowledgments of
instruments or documents. If the acknowledgment is
made before a notary public or authorized officer, his
certificate must be authenticated by the Philippine
embassy or consul. (See Dycoco v. Orina, G.R. No.
18483, 30 July 2010).
Note however that under the Apostille
Convention on Authentication of Documents to
which the Philippines is a signatory, where a foreign
country which is a signatory to the convention has
180
affixed an apostille
to a document, that document
need no longer be authenticated by a Philippine
consular officer in order to be received in evidence
in the Philippines.

180

A certification under the terms of the convention. If the convention

applies between two countries, such an apostille is sufficient to certify a
document's validity, and removes the need for double-certification, by the
originating country and then by the receiving country.

988

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

Alleging that his signature as seller in a deed of
sale of land was forged, Dela Rama filed an
action for annulment of title against the
registered owner Papa. Papa admitted that he
did not see the seller sign the deed and that he
did not appear before the notary public to
acknowledge the deed. The RTC ruled in favor
of Dela Rama but on appeal the CA reversed.
The CA held that since the document was a
public document, then the evidence needed to
prove forgery was clear and convincing
evidence, which Dela Rama failed to muster.
Was the CAs reasoning correct?

A.

No. An improperly notarized deed of sale is not a
public document which carries the presumption of
due execution and authenticity. Here Papa did not
appear before the notary to acknowledge the deed
of sale. Hence the evidentiary standard to prove
forgery is merely preponderance of evidence, not
clear and convincing evidence. Dela Ramas
testimony that his signature was forged taken with
the testimony of Papa that he did not see Dela
Rama sign and that he (Papa) did not acknowledge
the document before the notary public was
sufficient to prove forgery even without presenting a
handwriting expert. (Dela Rama v. Papa, G.R. No.
142309, 30 January 2009).

Q.

The acknowledgment portion of a real estate
mortgage did not indicate the person who
appeared before the notary public as the blank
for the name of the person was not filled in.
May the real estate mortgage be considered a
public document?

989

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

No. Since the real estate mortgage was improperly
notarized, it is not a public document but a private
document which has to be authenticated under
S20 R132. (Dycoco v. Orina, G.R. No. 18483, 30
July 2010).

Q.

When will an alteration affect the admissibility
of a document?

A.

An alteration will affect the admissibility of a
document if: (GEM)
(1) The document is being offered as genuine.
(2) The alteration was made after the execution of
the document.
(3) The alteration is in a part material to Jhe
question in dispute. (S31 R132).

Q.

May an alteration affecting the admissibility of a
document be explained by the proponent?

A.

Yes. He may show that the alteration was made by
another, without his consent, or was made with the
consent of the parties affected by it, or was
otherwise properly or innocently made, or that the
alteration did not change the meaning or language
of the instrument. (CAMPI). If he fails to do that, the
document shall not be admissible in evidence.
(S31 R132).

Q.

Is a document written in Cebuano admissible in
evidence?

A.

No. Documents written in an unofficial language shall
not be admitted as evidence, unless accompanied
with a translation into English or Filipino.

990

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

The trial court took into consideration accuseds
extrajudicial confession in Cebuano in convicting
him. On appeal, the accused contends for the
first time that his confession should not have
been received in evidence pursuant to S33
R132. Is the accuseds contention correct?

A.

No. Accuseds extrajudicial confession in Cebuano
should have been translated by the official
interpreter of the court or a translation agreed upon
by the parties and both the original and the
translation filed. If S33 R132 were to be strictly
observed, the extrajudicial confession should not
have been admitted by the trial court as evidence
for the prosecution. Nevertheless considering the
accused did not interpose any objection thereto
during the trial and the parties and the judicial
personnel appear to be familiar with Cebuano, the
extrajudicial confession was properly considered by
the trial court. (People v. Tonaquin, G.R. No.
133188, 23 July 2004).
OFFER AND OBJECTION

Q.

Why is an offer of evidence important?

A.

An offer of evidence is important because the court
shall consider no evidence which has not been
formally offered. (S34 R132).

Q.

Is it required that the purpose for which the
evidence is offered must be specified?

A.

Yes. (S34 R132). The reason is to enable the other
party to object and to enable the court to make an
intelligent ruling. Furthermore, evidence may be

991

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

offered for two or more purposes and this necessarily
requires that the purposes be specified.
Q.

Certain documents were marked and identified
by a party but not formally offered in evidence.
May the court consider these in rendering
its decision?

A.

No. Mere identification of documents and the
marking thereof as exhibits does not confer any
evidentiary weight on the documents unless these
are formally offered. (Heirs of Cruz-Zamora v.
Multiwood International Inc., 19 January 2009).

Q.

When and how is evidence offered?

A.

All evidence must be offered orally.
The offer of the testimony of a witness in
evidence must be made at the time the witness is
called to testify.181
The offer of documentary and object evidence
shall be made after the presentation of a party's
testimonial evidence.182 (S35 R132, as amended by
the 2020 Rules on Evidence).
CRIMINAL CASES. The offer of evidence, the
comment/objection thereto, and the court ruling
shall be made orally. A party is required to make
his/her oral offer of evidence on the same day after
the presentation of his/her last witness, and the

181\n cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule, the party presenting the
judicial affidavit of his witness in place of direct testimony shall state the purpose
of such testimony at the start of the presentation of the witness.
,82ln cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule, upon the termination of
the testimony of his last witness, a party shall immediately make an oral offer of
evidence of his documentary or object exhibits, piece by piece, in their
chronological order, stating the purpose or purposes for which he offers the
particular exhibit.

992

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

opposing party is required to immediately interpose
his/her oral comment/objection thereto. Thereafter,
the court shall make a ruling on the offer of
evidence in open court.
In making the offer, the counsel shall cite the
specific page numbers of the court record where the
exhibits being offered are found, if attached thereto.
The court shall ensure that all exhibits offered are
submitted to it on the same day of the offer.
If the exhibits are not attached to the record,
the party making the offer must submit the same
during the offer of evidence in open court. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
Q.

X and Y were charged with murder. Upon
application
of the prosecution, Y was
discharged from the Information to be utilized
as a state witness. The prosecutor presented Y
as witness but forgot to state the purpose of his
testimony much less offer it in evidence. Y
testified that he and X conspired to kill the
victim but it was X who actually shot the victim.
The testimony of Y was the only material
evidence establishing the guilt of X. Y was
thoroughly cross-examined by the defense
counsel. After the prosecution rested its case,
the defense filed a demurrer to evidence based
on the following grounds:
(a) The testimony of Y should be excluded
because its purpose was not initially stated
and it was not formally offered in evidence
as required by S34 R132 Revised Rules of
Evidence; and

993

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(b) Ys testimony is not admissible against X
pursuant to the rule on res inter alios acta.
Rule on the demurrer to evidence on the
above grounds. (03 Bar Q20ed).
A.

Demurrer to evidence denied.
(a) The ground that Ys testimony should be
excluded because its purpose was not initially
stated and it was not formally offered in evidence
as required by Section 34, Rule 132 of the
Revised Rules of Evidence is untenable.
X waived this ground when he did not raise it as
an objection after Y had been called to testify.183
(b) The ground that Ys testimony is not admissible
against X pursuant to the rule on res inter alios
acta is also untenable. The res inter alios
acta rule under S29 R130 applies only to
acts, declarations, and omissions which are
extra-judicial.
Here Ys testimony was made in court and he
could be cross-examined as in fact he was crossexamined by X.

Q.

May evidence offered for one purpose be
considered for another?

A.

No. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 550 [6th rev. ed.] citing People v.
Diano [CA] 66 O.G. 6405).

,83Under S36 R132 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence, objection to the
testimony of a witness for lack of a formal offer must be made as soon as the
witness begins to testify.

994

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

When and how should an objection to evidence
be made?

A.

Objection to offer of evidence must be made orally
immediately after the offer is made.
Objection to the testimony of a witness for lack
of a formal offer must be made as soon as the
witness begins to testify. Objection to a question
propounded in the course of the oral examination of
a witness must be made as soon as the grounds
therefor become reasonably apparent.
The grounds for the objections must be
specified. (S36 R132 as amended by the 2020
Rules on Evidence).
UNDER THE JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE.
The party presenting the judicial affidavit of his
witness in place of direct testimony shall state the
purpose of such testimony at the start of the
presentation of the witness. The adverse party may
then move to disqualify the witness or to strike out
his affidavit or any of the answers found in it on
ground of inadmissibility.

Q.

At what point in time should one object to
testimonial evidence?

A.

At two points. First immediately after the offer is
made, and second, when an objectionable question
is asked of the witness. Objection must be made
immediately after the offer is made. Objection
to a question propounded in the course of the
oral examination of a witness shall be made as
soon as the ground therefor shall become
reasonably apparent.

995

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

After an objectionable question had been asked
by plaintiffs counsel, defendants counsel
immediately said, Objection, your Honor!
Should the judge sustain the objection?

A.

No. S34 R132 requires that the ground for the
objection must be specified.

Q.

What is a specific objection and what is a
general objection?

A.

A specific objection is one which employs a specific
ground therefor, like hearsay while a general
objection uses broad or sweeping grounds such as
irrelevant and incompetent.

Q.

Is a general objection prohibited?

A.

There is no provision in the Rules of Evidence
expressly prohibiting general objections. It is
submitted that they are not prohibited where the
evidence is orally offered. In such a case if the
objection is overruled, the objector must follow up
with a specific objection. If he does not do so, then
he cannot assign any error to the courts ruling.
Where evidence has been offered in writing, a
general objection is improper. Thus a comment/
objection to a written offer of a document on the
ground that it is immaterial, irrelevant, and
impertinent was held to be a virtual admission of
the authenticity of the document. (Dycoco v. Orina,
G.R. No. 18483, 30 July 2010).

Q.

A father (Rolando) filed a petition to fix parental
authority against his wife Melissa. During pre
trial, Rolando manifested that he would be
presenting, among other witnesses, Dr. Cristina
996

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Gates (Gates), who will testify on the mental
status and fitness of Rolando to exercise
parental authority.
At the hearing, Gates was presented as an
expert witness. She confirmed the technical
qualifications and professional skill stated in
her judicial affidavit and curriculum vitae. She
also discussed the findings contained in
Rolando's psychological evaluation report.
Applying clinical hypnosis, phenomenologicalexistential study and historical-contextual
approach, Gates opined that Rolando could not
have molested the minors. As retrieved from
Rolando's memory while under hypnotic trance,
Gates narrated that the children have accidentally
witnessed their parents in the act of sexual
intercourse for several occasions and explained
that this experience caused them to develop
sexual hyperactivity. Gates was then subjected
to cross-examination. But before propounding
any questions, Melissa's counsel, in open court,
moved to strike out the direct testimony
of Gates on grounds that her expertise had
not been established and that any evidence
derived from hypnotically-induced recollection
is inadmissible. Should the motion to strike out
be granted?
A.

No. Objection to the witnesss qualification as
expert should be timely made. Petitioner Melissa
should have objected during the course of Gates'
direct testimony on her qualifications as an expert
witness and explaining the mechanics of the
psychological examination which she conducted on
respondent. Petitioner should not have waited in
997

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

ambush after the expert witness had already
finished testifying. (Magsino v. Magsino, 18 Feb
2019, Reyes, J.).
Q.

When may a witnesss answer be stricken off
the record?

A.
1) Where a witness answered the question before
the adverse party had the opportunity to voice
fully its objection, and such objection is found to
be meritorious, the court shall sustain the
objection and order the answer given to be
stricken off the record. (S39R132).
2) Where a question is not objectionable, but the
answer is not responsive.
3) Where a witness testifies without a question being
posed or testifies beyond limits set by the court.
4) When the witness does a narration instead of
answering the question.
if such objection is found to be meritorious, the
court shall sustain the objection and order such
answer, testimony or narration to be stricken off
the record.
5) Where the answer is incompetent, irrelevant, or
otherwise improper. (Id.). On proper motion, the
court may also order the striking out of such
answers. This presupposes that the ground for
the objection was not reasonably apparent
when the question was asked but only became
so after the witness had answered.

998

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

When may a continuing objection be made?

A.

When a party has previously objected to a question,
whether sustained or overruled, and succeeding
questions are of the same class as those previously
objected to, it shall not be necessary to repeat the
objection, it being sufficient for the adverse party to
record his continuing objection to such class of
questions. (S37 R132).

Q.

When must the court give its ruling upon the
objection?

A.

The ruling of the court must be given immediately
after the objection is made, unless the court desires
to take a reasonable time to inform itself on the
question presented; but the ruling shall always be
made during the trial and at such time as will give
the party against whom it is made an opportunity
to meet the situation presented by the ruling.
(S38 R132).
In case covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule,
the court shall promptly rule on the motion to
disqualify the witness or to strike out his affidavit or
any of the answers therein. If granted, the court
shall cause the marking of any excluded answer by
placing it in brackets under the initials of an
authorized court personnel, without prejudice to a
tender of excluded evidence under S40 R132.

Q.

Should the court state the reason for sustaining
or overruling the objection?

A.

No, the court need not state the reason for
sustaining or overruling an objection, except when
the objection is based on 2 or more grounds in

999

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

which case a ruling sustaining the objection must
specify the ground/s relied upon. (S38 R132).
Q.

Counsel A objected to a question posed by
opposing Counsel B on the grounds that it was
hearsay and it assumed a fact not yet
established. The judge banged his gavel and
ruled by saying "Objection Sustained". Can
Counsel ask for a reconsideration of the ruling?
Why? (12 Bar Essay Q7a)

A.

Yes Counsel can ask for a reconsideration of
the ruling.
Under S38 R132, when the objection is based
on 2 or more grounds, a ruling sustaining the
objection must specify the ground/s relied upon.
Here the courts ruling did not state which of the
two grounds it relied upon in sustaining the
objection. Hence the Counsel can aks for a
reconsideration of the ruling.

Q.

What is the remedy of the offeror if the evidence
offered is excluded?

A.

The remedy of the offeror is to avail of the remedy
known as tender of excluded evidence or offer
of proof.
If documentary or object evidence is excluded
by the court, the offeror may have the same
attached to or made part of the record. If the
evidence excluded is oral, the offeror may state for
the record the name and other personal
circumstances of the witness and the substance of
the proposed testimony. (S40R132).

1000

J9JC9B0M

Rule 132
Presentation Of Evidence

Q.

What is the purpose of making a tender
of excluded evidence? What is the consequence
if the offeror fails to make a tender of excluded
evidence?

A.

The purpose of making a tender of excluded
evidence is to allow the appellate court to assess
whether the trial courts exclusion of the evidence is
proper. If the offeror fails to tender excluded
evidence, then the ruling of the trial court excluding
the evidence may no longer be reviewed by the
appellate court.

Q.

Viveca brought against her husband Philip
(Petitioner) an action for legal separation and
dissolution of conjugal partnership on the
grounds of marital infidelity and physical abuse.
During trial Viveca moved for the issuance of a
subpoena duces tecum and ad testificandum to
Insular Life officers to compel production of
the insurance application and policy procured
by Philip where the beneficiary was suspected
to be Philips illegitimate child. The trial
court denied the motion on the ground that
under Circular Letter No. 11-2000 issued by the
Insurance Commission, insurance companies/
agents are prohibited from divulging confidential
and privileged information
pertaining to
insurance policies.
Viveca filed a motion for reconsideration
but this was denied. She filed a petition for
certiorari under R65 with the Court of Appeals.
In the trial court, she filed her formal offer of
rebuttal exhibits with tender of excluded evidence

1001

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

on the insurance policy and application. Philip
argues that Vivecas tender of excluded evidence
mooted her R65 petition.
a) Was the R65 petition of Viveca rendered
moot and academic when she made a tender
of excluded evidence before the trial court?
b) Are the contents of an insurance policy and
application confidential and privileged?
A.
a) No the R65 petition of Viveca was not rendered
moot and academic when she made a tender of
excluded evidence before the trial court.
Under S40 R132 before tender of excluded
evidence may be made the evidence must be formally
offered to the court and denied admission by it.
Here the insurance policy and application were
not formally offered to the trial court since their
production was at the outset prevented by the
denial of the application for subpoena duces tecum.
Hence the tender of excluded evidence was not an
adequate remedy which precluded or mooted the
petition for certiorari.
b) No the contents of an insurance policy and
application are not privileged and confidential.
The Insurance Commission itself has issued
an opinion that Circular Letter No. 11-2000 was not
designed to obstruct lawful court orders. {Yu v. CA,
G.R. 154115, 29 Nov 05).

1002

J9JC9B0M

RULE 133. WEIGHT AND SUFFICIENCY
OF EVIDENCE
Q.

What is quantum of evidence?

A.

Quantum of evidence is the weight of evidence
required to discharge the burden of proof.

Q.

in civil cases, what is the quantum of evidence?

A.

In civil cases, the party having the burden of proof must
establish his case by preponderance of evidence.
Preponderance of evidence means that the evidence
adduced by one side is, as a whole, superior to or has
greater weight than that of the other.

Q.

What factors may the court consider in
determining where the preponderance of evidence
on the issues involved lies?

A.

a) All the facts and circumstances of the case;
b) The witnesses manner of testifying, their
intelligence, their means andopportunity of
knowing the facts to which they are testifying,
the nature of the facts to which they testify, the
probability or improbability of their testimony,
their interest or want of interest, and also their
personal credibility so far as the same may
legitimately appear upon the trial;
c) The number of witnesses, though the
preponderance of evidence is not necessarily
with the greater number. (S1 R133).

Q.

What is the quantum of evidence in cases
before administrative or quasi-judicial bodies?

1003

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

A.

In cases filed before administrative or quasi-judicial
bodies, a fact may be deemed established if it is
supported by substantial evidence, or that amount of
relevant evidence which a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to justify a conclusion. (S5 R133).
Substantial evidence is defined as such amount of
relevant evidence which a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to support a conclusion. It is more
than a mere scintilla of evidence. The standard of
substantial evidence is satisfied when there is a
reasonable ground to believe, based on the evidence
submitted, that the respondent is responsible for
the misconduct complained of. It need not be
overwhelming or preponderant, as is required in an
ordinary civil case, or evidence beyond reasonable
doubt, as is required in criminal cases, but the
evidence must be enough for a reasonable mind to
support a conclusion. (Ombudsman v. Mallari, G.R.
No. 183161,3 December 2014).

Q.

In criminal cases, what is the quantum of
evidence needed to convict the accused?

A.

In criminal cases, the quantum of evidence needed
for conviction is proof beyond reasonable doubt. An
accused is entitled to an acquittal unless his guilt is
shown beyond reasonable doubt. (S2 R133).

Q.

What is proof beyond reasonable doubt?

A.

Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean such
a degree of proof as, excluding possibility of error,
produces absolute certainty. Moral certainty only is
required, or that degree of proof which produces
conviction in an unprejudiced mind. (S2 R132).

Q.

What is circumstantial evidence? In criminal
cases is it sufficient for conviction?
1004

J9JC9B0M

Rule 133
Weight And Sufficiency Of Evidence

A.

Circumstantial evidence is that which proves the fact
in issue by way of inference or presumption, unlike
direct evidence which proves the fact in issue without
the aid of any inference or presumption.
Circumstantial evidence is sufficient for conviction if:
a) There is more than one circumstance;
b) The facts from which the inferences are derived
are proven; and
c) The combination of all the circumstances is
such as to produce a conviction beyond
reasonable doubt. (S4 R133).
Inferences cannot be based on other inferences.

Q.

What is the weight to be given the opinion of an
expert witness?

A.

In any case where the opinion of an expert witness
is received in evidence, the court has a wide
latitude of discretion in determining the weight to be
given to such opinion, and for that purpose may
consider the following:
(a) Whether the opinion is based upon sufficient
facts or data;
(b) Whether it is the product of reliable principles
and methods;
(c)

Whether the witness has applied the principles
and methods reliably to the facts of the case; and

(d)

Such other factors as the court may deem helpful
to make such determination. (S5 R133).184

,84This is a new provision added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

1005

J9JC9B0M

RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CASES
(A.M. NO. 09-6-8-SC)
Q.

Give the scope and applicability of the Rules of
Procedure for Environmental Cases (RPEC).

A.

These Rules shall govern the procedure in civil,
criminal and special civil actions before the
Regional Trial Courts, Metropolitan Trial Courts,
Municipal Trial Courts in Cities, Municipal Trial
Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts involving
enforcement or violations of environmental and
other related laws, rules and regulations.

Q.

Who may file a civil action involving the
enforcement or violation of any environmental
law?

A.

Any real party in interest, including the government
and juridical entities authorized by law, may file
such action. A citizen suit may also be filed by any
Filipino citizen in representation of others, including
minors or generations yet unborn, to enforce rights
or obligations under environmental laws.

Q.

May a court issue a TRO or a writ of preliminary
injunction against lawful actions of government
agencies that enforce environmental laws or
prevent violations thereof?

A.

No. No court may issue such a TRO or writ of
preliminary injunction except for the Supreme Court.

Q.

What pleadings are allowed under the RPEC?

A.

The pleadings and motions that may be filed are
complaint, answer which may include compulsory
1006

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

counterclaim and cross-claim, motion for intervention,
motion for discovery and motion for reconsideration
of the judgment.
Motion for postponement, motion for new trial
and petition for relief from judgment shall be
allowed in highly meritorious cases or to prevent a
manifest miscarriage of justice.
Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings and motions?

A.

The following pleadings or motions shall not be
allowed: (4M (d bed) RRT)
(a) Motion to dismiss the complaint;
(b) Motion for a bill of particulars;
(c) Motion for extension of time to file pleadings,
except to file answer, the extension not to
exceed fifteen (15) days;
(d) Motion to declare the defendant in default;
(e) Reply and rejoinder; and
(f) Third party complaint.

Q.

Within what time should the defendant answer
the complaint?

A.

Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of summons,
the defendant shall file a verified answer to the
complaint and serve a copy thereof on the plaintiff.
The defendant shall attach affidavits of witnesses,
reports, studies of experts and all evidence in
support of the defense. (S14)

1007

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Are affirmative and special defenses
pleaded in the answer deemed waived?

A.

Yes. Affirmative and special defenses not pleaded
shall be deemed waived, except lack of jurisdiction.
(S14)

Q.

What is the effect if cross-claims and compulsory
counterclaims are not asserted in the answer?

A.

Cross-claims and compulsory counterclaims not
asserted shall be considered barred. (S14)

Q.

Within what time should counterclaims and
cross-claims be answered?

A.

The answer to counterclaims or cross-claims shall be
filed and served within ten (10) days from service of
the answer in which they are pleaded. (S14)

Q.

What is the effect if the defendant fails to answer
the complaint within the period provided?

A.

Should the defendant fail to answer the complaint
within the period provided, the court shall declare
defendant in default and upon motion of the
plaintiff, shall receive evidence ex parte and render
judgment based thereon and the reliefs prayed
for. (S15).

Q.

When shall the court issue the notice of pre
trial? When shall the pre-trial be held?

A.

Within two (2) days from the filing of the answer to
the counterclaim or cross-claim, if any, the branch
clerk of court shall issue a notice of the pre-trial to
be held not later than one (1) month from the filing
of the last pleading.

1008

not

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

The court shall schedule the pre-trial and set
as many pre-trial conferences as may be necessary
within a period of two (2) months counted from the
date of the first pre-trial conference.
Q.

Shall the case be referred to mediation?

A.

Yes. At the start of the pre-trial conference, the court
shall inquire from the parties if they have settled the
dispute; otherwise, the court shall immediately refer
the parties or their counsel, if authorized by their
clients, to the Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) unit
for purposes of mediation. If not available, the court
shall refer the case to the clerk of court or legal
researcher for mediation.
Mediation must be conducted within a non
extendible period of thirty (30) days from receipt of
notice of referral to mediation.
The mediation report must be submitted
within ten (10) days from the expiration of the 30day period.

Q.

When may a preliminary conference be conducted?
What are the purposes of the pre-trial conference?

A.

If mediation fails, the court will schedule the
continuance of the pre-trial. Before the scheduled
date of continuance, the court may refer the case to
the branch clerk of court for a preliminary
conference for the following purposes:
(a) To assist the parties in reaching a settlement;
(b) To mark the documents or exhibits to be
presented by the parties and copies thereof to
be attached to the records after comparison
with the originals;
1009

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(c) To ascertain from the parties the undisputed
facts and admissions on the genuineness and
due execution of the documents marked
as exhibits;
(d) To require the parties to submit the depositions
taken under Rule 23 of the Rules of Court, the
answers to written interrogatories under Rule
25, and the answers to request for admissions
by the adverse party under Rule 26;
(e) To require the production of documents or
things requested by a party under Rule 27
and the results of the physical and mental
examination of persons under Rule 28;
(f) To consider such other matters as may aid in its
prompt disposition;
(g) To record the proceedings in the Minutes of
Preliminary Conference to be signed by both
parties or their counsels;
(h) To mark the affidavits of witnesses which shall
be in question and answer form and shall
constitute the direct examination of the
witnesses; and
(i) To attach the minutes together with the marked
exhibits before the pre-trial proper.
The parties or their counsel must submit to the
branch clerk of court the names, addresses and
contact numbers of the affiants.
During the preliminary conference, the branch
clerk of court shall also require the parties to submit
the depositions taken under Rule 23 of the Rules of
Court, the answers to written interrogatories under
1010

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Rule 25 and the answers to request for admissions
by the adverse party under Rule 26. The branch
clerk of court may also require the production of
documents or things requested by a party under
Rule 27 and the results of the physical and mental
examination of persons under Rule 28.
Q.

Describe in brief the duty of the judge during
the pre-trial conference.

A.

The judge shall put the parties and their counsels
under oath, and they shall remain under oath in all
pre-trial conferences.
The judge shall exert best efforts to persuade
the parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute.
The judge may issue a consent decree approving
the agreement between the parties in accordance
with law, morals, public order and public policy
to protect the right of the people to a balanced
and healthful ecology.

Q.

What is a consent decree?

A.

Consent decree refers to a judicially-approved
settlement between concerned parties based on
public interest and public policy to protect and
preserve the environment.

Q.

What is the effect if evidence is not presented
during the pre-trial?

A.

Evidence not presented during the pre-trial, except
newly-discovered evidence, shall be deemed waived.

Q.

What is an environmental protection order?

A.

Environmental protection order (EPO) refers to an
order issued by the court directing or enjoining any
1011

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

person or government agency to perform or desist
from performing an act in order to protect, preserve
or rehabilitate the environment.
Q.

When
may
a
temporary
environmental
protection order (TEPO) be issued?

A.

If it appears from the verified complaint with a
prayer for the issuance of an Environmental
Protection Order (EPO) that the matter is of
extreme urgency and the applicant will suffer grave
injustice and irreparable injury, the executive judge
of the multiplesala court before raffle or the
presiding judge of a single-sala court as the case
may be, may issue ex parte a TEPO effective for
only seventy-two (72) hours from date of the receipt
of the TEPO by the party or person enjoined. Within
said period, the court where the case is assigned,
shall conduct a summary hearing to determine
whether the TEPO may be extended until the
termination of the case.
The court where the case is assigned, shall
periodically monitor the existence of acts that are
the subject matter of the TEPO even if issued by
the executive judge, and may lift the same at any
time as circumstances may warrant.

Q.

Is a bond required for the issuance of a TEPO?

A.

No, the applicant shall be exempted from the
posting of a bond for the issuance of a TEPO.

Q.

What are the reliefs that may be granted in a
citizen suit?

A.

If warranted, the court may grant to the plaintiff
proper reliefs which shall include the protection,
preservation or rehabilitation of the environment
1012

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

and the payment of attorneys fees, costs of suit
and other litigation expenses. It may also require
the violator to submit a program of rehabilitation or
restoration of the environment, the costs of which
shall be borne by the violator, or to contribute to
a special trust fund for that purpose subject to
the control of the court.
Q.

Is a judgment directing the performance of acts
for the protection, preservation or rehabilitation
of the environment executory pending appeal?

A.

Yes, unless restrained by the appellate court.

Q.

When may a permanent EPO or a writ of
continuing mandamus be issued?

A.

In the judgment, the court may convert the TEPO to
a permanent EPO or issue a writ of continuing
mandamus directing the performance of acts which
shall be effective until the judgment is fully satisfied.

Q.

What steps may be taken to monitor the
execution of the judgment?

A.

The court may, by itself or through the appropriate
government agency, monitor the execution of the
judgment and require the party concerned to submit
written reports on a quarterly basis or sooner as
may be necessary, detailing the progress of the
execution and satisfaction of the judgment. The
other party may, at its option, submit its comments
or observations on the execution of the judgment.

Q.

Define a strategic lawsuit
participation or SLAPP.

A.

A legal action filed to harass, vex, exert undue
pressure or stifle any legal recourse that any
1013

against

public

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

person, institution or the government has taken or
may take in the enforcement of environmental laws,
protection of the environment or assertion of
environmental rights.
Q.

May the defense that the case is a SLAPP be
interposed by the defendant? If so, how should
the defense be alleged?

A.

In a SLAPP filed against a person involved in the
enforcement of environmental laws, protection of
the environment, or assertion of environmental
rights, the defendant may file an answer interposing
as a defense that the case is a SLAPP and shall be
supported by documents, affidavits, papers and
other evidence; and, by way of counterclaim, pray
for damages, attorneys fees and costs of suit.

Q.

If a SLAPP defense is alleged in the answer,
what shall the court do?

A.

The court shall direct the plaintiff or adverse party to
file an opposition showing the suit is not a SLAPP,
attaching evidence in support thereof, within a non
extendible period of five (5) days from receipt of
notice that an answer has been filed.
The defense of a SLAPP shall be set for
hearing by the court after issuance of the order to
file an opposition within fifteen (15) days from filing
of the comment or the lapse of the period.

Q.

What is the nature of the hearing on the SLAPP
defense? What is the quantum of evidence in
the SLAPP hearing?

A.

The hearing on the defense of a SLAPP shall be
summary in nature. The parties must submit all
available evidence in support of their respective
1014

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

positions. The party seeking the dismissal of the
case must prove by substantial evidence that his
acts for the enforcement of environmental law is a
legitimate action for the protection, preservation
and rehabilitation of the environment. The party
filing the action assailed as a SLAPP shall prove by
preponderance of evidence that the action is not a
SLAPP and is a valid claim.
Q.

How shall the court resolve the SLAPP defense?

A.

The affirmative defense of a SLAPP shall be
resolved within thirty (30) days after the summary
hearing. If the court dismisses the action, the court
may award damages, attorneys fees and costs of
suit under a counterclaim if such has been filed.
The dismissal shall be with prejudice.
If the court rejects the defense of a SLAPP, the
evidence adduced during the summary hearing
shall be treated as evidence of the parties on the
merits of the case. The action shall proceed in
accordance with the Rules of Court.

Special Civil Action for the Issuance
of a Writ of Kalikasan
Q.

What is a Writ of Kalikasan? What is its nature?

A.

The writ is a remedy available to a natural or
juridical person, entity authorized by law, peoples
organization, non-governmental organization, or
any public interest group accredited by or
registered with any government agency, on behalf
of persons whose constitutional right to a balanced
and healthful ecology is violated, or threatened with
violation by an unlawful act or omission of a public
official or employee, or private individual or entity,
1015

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

involving environmental damage of such magnitude
as to prejudice the life, health or property of
inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces.
Q.

Does the service of a Writ of Kalikasan ipso
facto enjoin the respondent from doing the act
subject of the petition for a Writ of Kalikasan?

A.

No. Issuance of a Writ of Kalikasan and service
upon respondent requires the latter to file a verified
return within 10 days from service but does not ipso
facto enjoin or restrain the respondent unless a
TEPO (temporary environmental protection order)
was issued. (S5 R7, Rules of Procedure in
Environmental Cases).

Q.

Should the petition be verified? What are the
contents of the petition?

A.

The petition should be verified. The verified petition
shall contain the following:
(a) The personal circumstances of the petitioner;
(b) The name and personal circumstances of the
respondent or if the name and personal
circumstances are unknown and uncertain, the
respondent may be described by an assumed
appellation;
(c) The environmental law, rule or regulation
violated or threatened to be violated, the act or
omission complained of, and the environmental
damage of such magnitude as to prejudice the
life, health or property of inhabitants in two or
more cities or provinces.

1016

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

(d) All relevant and material evidence consisting of
the affidavits of witnesses, documentary
evidence, scientific or other expert studies, and
if possible, object evidence;
(e) The certification of petitioner under oath that:
(1) petitioner has not commenced any action
or filed any claim involving the same issues in
any court, tribunal or quasi-judicial agency,
and no such other action or claim is pending
therein; (2) if there is such other pending
action or claim, a complete statement of its
present status; (3) if petitioner should learn
that the same or similar action or claim has
been filed or is pending, petitioner shall report
to the court that fact within five (5) days
therefrom; and
(f) The reliefs prayed for which may include a
prayer for the issuance of a TEPO.
Q.

Where shall the petition be filed? Is the petition
subject to the payment of docket fees?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Supreme Court or
with any of the stations of the Court of Appeals.
The petitioner shall be exempt from the payment
of docket fees.

Q.

When shall the writ issue?

A.

Within three (3) days from the date of filing of the
petition, if the petition is sufficient in form and
substance, the court shall give an order: (a) issuing
the writ; and (b) requiring the respondent to file a
verified return. The clerk of court shall forthwith
issue the writ under the seal of the court including

1017

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the issuance of a cease and desist order and other
temporary reliefs effective until further order.
Q.

How is the writ served?

A.

The writ shall be served upon the respondent by a
court officer or any person deputized by the court,
who shall retain a copy on which to make a return of
service. In case the writ cannot be served personally,
the rule on substituted service shall apply.

Q.

What is the responsive pleading of the
respondent? Within what period should it be
filed and what should it contain?

A.

The responsive pleading of the respondent is the
verified return. Within a non-extendible period of
ten (10) days after service of the writ, the
respondent shall file a verified return which shall
contain all defenses to show that respondent did
not violate or threaten to violate, or allow the
violation of any environmental law, rule or regulation
or commit any act resulting to environmental
damage of such magnitude as to prejudice the life,
health or property of inhabitants in two or more
cities or provinces.
The return shall include affidavits of witnesses,
documentary evidence, scientific or other expert
studies, and if possible, object evidence, in support
of the defense of the respondent.

Q.

What is the effect if a defense is not raised in
the return?

A.

All defenses not raised in the return shall be
deemed waived.

1018

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Q.

What is the effect of a general denial in the return?

A.

A general denial of allegations in the petition shall
be considered as an admission thereof.

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings and motions?

A.

The following pleadings and motions are prohibited:
(5M [bed dp] RTCC)
(a) Motion to dismiss;
(b) Motion for extension of time to file return;
(c) Motion for postponement;
(d) Motion for a bill of particulars;
(e) Counterclaim or cross-claim;
(f) Third-party complaint;
(g) Reply; and
(h) Motion to declare respondent in default.

Q.

What are the discovery measures or interim
reliefs that may be availed of by a party?

A.

A party may file a verified motion for the following
reliefs:
(a)
OCULAR INSPECTION; ORDER  The
motion must show that an ocular inspection order is
necessary to establish the magnitude of the violation
or the threat as to prejudice the life, health or property
of inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces. It
shall state in detail the place or places to be
inspected. It shall be supported by affidavits of
witnesses having personal knowledge of the violation
or threatened violation of environmental law.
1019

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

After hearing, the court may order any person
in possession or control of a designated land or
other property to permit entry for the purpose of
inspecting or photographing the property or any
relevant object or operation thereon.
The order shall specify the person or persons
authorized to make the inspection and the date,
time, place and manner of making the inspection
and may prescribe other conditions to protect the
constitutional rights of all parties.
(b)
PRODUCTION OR INSPECTION OF
DOCUMENTS OR THINGS; ORDER - The motion
must show that a production order is necessary to
establish the magnitude of the violation or the
threat as to prejudice the life, health or property of
inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces.
After hearing, the court may order any person in
possession, custody or control of any designated
documents, papers, books, accounts, letters,
photographs, objects or tangible things, or objects in
digitized or electronic form, which constitute or
contain evidence relevant to the petition or the return,
to produce and permit their inspection, copying or
photographing by or on behalf of the movant.
The production order shall specify the person
or persons authorized to make the production and
the date, time, place and manner of making the
inspection or production and may prescribe other
conditions to protect the constitutional rights of
all parties.

1020

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Q.

When shall the court render judgment?

A.

Within sixty (60) days from the time the petition is
submitted for decision, the court shall render
judgment granting or denying the privilege of the
writ of kalikasan.

Q.

What are the reliefs that may be granted under
the writ?

A.

The reliefs that may be granted under the writ are
the following:
(a)

Directing respondent to permanently cease
and desist from committing acts or neglecting
the performance of a duty in violation of
environmental laws resulting in environmental
destruction or damage;

(b)

Directing the respondent public official,
government agency, private person or entity to
protect, preserve, rehabilitate or restore the
environment;

(c)

Directing the respondent public
official,
government agency, private person or entity to
monitor strict compliance with the decision and
orders of the court;

(d)

Directing the respondent public
official,
government agency, or private person or entity
to make periodic reports on the execution of
the final judgment; and

(e)

Such other reliefs which relate to the right of
the people to a balanced and healthful ecology
or to the protection, preservation, rehabilitation
or restoration of the environment, except the
award of damages to individual petitioners.
1021

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Are the above mentioned reliefs exhaustive?

A.

No. The above enumerated reliefs are non-exhaustive.
The reliefs that may be granted under the writ are
broad, comprehensive and non-exclusive. (Paje v.
Casino, G.R. No. 207257, 3 February 2015).

Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from
the judgment?

A.

Within fifteen (15) days from the date of notice of
the adverse judgment or denial of motion for
reconsideration, any party may appeal to the
Supreme Court under Rule 45. The appeal may
raise questions of fact.

Q.

Does the service of a Writ of Kalikasan ipso
facto enjoin the respondent from doing the act
subject of the petition for a Writ of Kalikasan?

A.

No. Issuance of a Writ of Kalikasan and service
upon respondent requires the latter to file a verified
return within 10 days from service but does not ipso
facto enjoin or restrain the respondent unless a
TEPO (temporary environmental protection order)
was issued. (S5 R7, Rules of Procedure in
Environmental Cases).

Q.

In July 2012, Rep. Casino, et al. (Casino Group),
filed with the Supreme Court a Petition for Writ of
Kalikasan against RP Energy, Subic Bay
Metropolitan Authority (SBMA), and DENR
Secretary Paje seeking in the main to stop the
construction and operation of a coal-fired power
plant in the Subic Bay Freeport Zone. The SC
resolved to issue a Writ of Kalikasan and to refer
the case to the Court of Appeals for hearing and
reception of evidence and rendition of judgment.
1022

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

In their Petition for Writ of Kalikasan, the
Casino Groups allegations, relative to the
actual or threatened violation of the constitutional
right to a balanced and healthful ecology, may
be grouped into two.
The first set of allegations deals with the
actual environmental damage that will occur if
the power plant project is implemented,
involving thermal, air, and water pollution which
would adversely affect the residents of the
Provinces of Bataan and Zambales, particularly
the Municipalities of Subic, Morong and
Hermosa, and the City of Olongapo.
The second set of allegations deals with
the failure to comply with certain laws and rules
governing or relating to the issuance of an
Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC)
and amendments thereto. The Casino Group
claims that the ECC was issued in violation of
(1) the DENR rules on the issuance and
amendment of an ECC, particularly, that there
was no environmental impact assessment (EIA)
relative to the first and second amendments to
the subject ECC, (2) Section 59 of the
Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA) Law,
requiring a certificate precondition that the
project site does not overlap with an ancestral
domain, and (3) Sections 26 and 27 of the Local
Government Code (LGC), requiring project
approval by the concerned sanggunian.
The CA rendered a decision denying the
privilege of the Writ of Kalikasan and the
application for an environment protection order
due to the failure of the Casino Group to prove
1023

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

that its constitutional right to a balanced and
healthful ecology was violated or threatened.
However, the CA resolved to invalidate the ECC
for non-compliance with Section 59 of the IPRA
Law and Sections 26 and 27 of the LGC and in
view of the failure of RP Energy to comply with
the restrictions set forth in the ECC, which
specifically require that any expansion of the
project beyond the project description or any
change in the activity shall be subject to a new
Environmental Impact Assessment.
Both parties appealed to the SC. There is no
cavil that the Casino Group failed to substantiate
its claims that the construction and operation of
the power plant would cause environmental
damage of the magnitude contemplated under the
Writ of Kalikasan. The critical issue is whether the
CA acted properly in invalidating the ECC in a
proceeding for the issuance of a Writ of
Kalikasan. Can the validity of an ECC be
challenged via a Writ of Kalikasan?
A.

No. The proper procedure to question a defect in an
ECC is to follow the DENR appeal process. After
complying with the proper administrative appeal
process, recourse may be made to the courts in
accordance with the doctrine of exhaustion of
administrative remedies.
However, in exceptional cases, a Writ of
Kalikasan may be availed of to challenge defects in
the ECC provided that (1) the defects are causally
linked or reasonably connected to an environmental
damage of the nature and magnitude contemplated
under the Rules on Writ of Kalikasan, and (2) the
case does not violate, or falls under an exception
1024

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

to, the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative
remedies and/or primary jurisdiction.
As to the claims that the issuance of the ECC
violated the IPRA Law and LGC, the same are not
within the coverage of the Writ of Kalikasan
because, assuming there was non-compliance
therewith, no reasonable connection can be made to
an actual or threatened violation of the right to a
balanced and healthful ecology of the magnitude
contemplated under the Rules. The alleged lack of
approval of the concerned sanggunians over the
subject project would not lead to or is not reasonably
connected with environmental damage but, rather, it
is an affront to the local autonomy of LGUs. Similarly,
the alleged lack of a certificate precondition that the
project site does not overlap with an ancestral
domain would not result in or is not reasonably
connected with environmental damage but, rather, it
is an impairment of the right of Indigenous Cultural
Communities/lndigenous Peoples (ICCs/IPs) to their
ancestral domains. These alleged violations could
be the subject of appropriate remedies before the
proper administrative bodies (like the NCIP) or a
separate action to compel compliance before the
courts, as the case may be.
The allegation that there was no environmental
impact assessment relative to the first and second
amendments to the subject ECC is however a defect
in the issuance of the ECC that can be reasonably
connected to an environmental damage of the
magnitude contemplated under the Rules. If this
were true, then the implementation of the project can
conceivably actually violate or threaten to violate the
right to a healthful and balanced ecology of the
inhabitants near the vicinity of the power plant. Thus,
1025

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the resolution of such an issue could conceivably be
resolved in a Writ of Kalikasan case provided that
the case does not violate, or is an exception to the
doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies
and primary jurisdiction. Given the extreme urgency
of resolving the issue due to the looming power
crisis, this case may be considered as falling under
an exception to the doctrine of exhaustion of
administrative remedies.
Nonetheless, the DENR reasonably exercised
its discretion in requiring an Environmental
Performance Report & Management Plan (EPRMP)
and a Project Description Report (PDR) for the first
and second amendments, respectively. Since what
were involved were only amendments, the existing
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) need only
be supplemented by the EPRMP and the PDR.
Through these documents, which the DENR
reviewed, a new EIA was conducted relative to the
proposed project modifications. (Paje v. Casino,
G.R. No. 207257, 3 February 2015).
Q.

in September 2016, Respondent Garganera for
and on his behalf, and in representation of the
People of the Cities of Cebu and Talisay and the
future generations, including the unborn
(respondent) filed against the petitioner Cebu
City Mayor a petition for writ of kalikasan with
prayer for the issuance of a Temporary
Environmental Protection Order (TEPO) before
the CA. Respondent asserted that the continued
operation of the Inayawan landfill causes
serious environmental damage which threatens
and violates their right to a balanced and
healthful ecology.
1026

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

The CA granted a writ of kalikasan,
required petitioner to file a verified return and a
summary hearing was set for the application. In
petitioner's verified return, he alleged that
respondent failed to comply with the condition
precedent which requires 30-day notice to the
public officer concerned prior to the filing of a
citizens suit under R.A. 9003 (Ecological Solid
Waste Management Act) and R.A. 8749 (Phil.
Clean Air Act). Is the 30-day notice under R.A.
9003 and R.A. 8749 a requirement for the filing
of a petition for Writ of Kalikasan?
A.

No. A petition for writ of kalikasan under the RPEC
is a separate and distinct action from R.A. 9003
and R.A. 8749. A writ of kalikasan is an
extraordinary remedy covering environmental
damage of such magnitude that will prejudice the
life, health or property of inhabitants in two or more
cities or provinces. It is designed for a narrow but
special purpose: to accord a stronger protection for
environmental rights, aiming, among others, to
provide a speedy and effective resolution of a case
involving the violation of one's constitutional right to
a healthful and balanced ecology that transcends
political and territorial boundaries, and to address
the potentially exponential nature of large-scale
ecological threats.
Given that the writ of kalikasan is an
extraordinary remedy and the RPEC allows direct
action to the SC and the CA where it is dictated by
public welfare, the prior 30-day notice requirement
for citizen suits under R.A. 9003 and R.A. 8749 is
inapplicable. (Osmena v. Garganera, 20 March
2018, e.b., Tijam, J.).
1027

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Writ of Continuing Mandamus
Q.

When may a petition for a writ of continuing
mandamus be availed of?

A.

When any agency or instrumentality of the
government or officer thereof unlawfully neglects
the performance of an act which the law specifically
enjoins as a duty resulting from an office, trust or
station in connection with the enforcement or
violation of an environmental law, rule or regulation
or a right therein, or unlawfully excludes another
from the use or enjoyment of such right and there is
no other plain, speedy and adequate remedy in the
ordinary course of law, the person aggrieved
thereby may file a verified petition in the proper
court, alleging the facts with certainty, attaching
thereto supporting evidence, specifying that the
petition concerns an environmental law, rule or
regulation, and praying that judgment be rendered
commanding the respondent to do an act or series
of acts until the judgment is fully satisfied, and to
pay damages sustained by the petitioner by reason
of the malicious neglect to perform the duties of the
respondent, under the law, rules or regulations. The
petition shall also contain a sworn certification of
non-forum shopping.

Q.

Where may the petition be filed? Is the same
subject to the payment of docket fees?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Regional Trial
Court exercising jurisdiction over the territory where
the actionable neglect or omission occurred or with
the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court.

1028

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

The petitioner shall
payment of docket fees.

be exempt from

the

Q.

When shall the writ issue?

A.

If the petition is sufficient in form and substance, the
court shall issue the writ and require the
respondent to comment on the petition within ten
(10) days from receipt of a copy thereof. Such order
shall be served on the respondents in such manner
as the court may direct, together with a copy of the
petition and any annexes thereto.

Q.

Describe the proceedings after the filing of the
comment.

A.

After the comment is filed or the time for the filing
thereof has expired, the court may hear the case
which shall be summary in nature or require the
parties to submit memoranda. The petition shall
be resolved without delay within sixty (60) days
from the date of the submission of the petition
for resolution.

Q.

State the reliefs and the measures the court
may provide in its judgment granting the
privilege of the writ of continuing mandamus.

A.

If warranted, the court shall grant the privilege of the
writ of continuing mandamus requiring respondent
to perform an act or series of acts until the
judgment is fully satisfied and to grant such other
reliefs as may be warranted resulting from the
wrongful or illegal acts of the respondent.
The court shall require the respondent to submit
periodic reports detailing the progress and execution
of the judgment, and the court may, by itself
or through a commissioner or the appropriate
1029

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

government
agency,
evaluate
and
monitor
compliance. The petitioner may submit its comments
or observations on the execution of the judgment.
The periodic reports submitted by the
respondent detailing compliance with the judgment
shall be contained in partial returns of the writ.
Upon full satisfaction of the judgment, a final return
of the writ shall be made to the court by the
respondent. If the court finds that the judgment has
been fully implemented, the satisfaction of
judgment shall be entered in the court docket.
Criminal Procedure
Q.

Who may file a criminal complaint for violation
of environmental laws?

A.

Any offended party, peace officer or any public
officer charged with the enforcement of an
environmental law may file a complaint before the
proper officer in accordance with the Rules of
Court. (S1 R9 RPEC).
Note: This provision seems to have confounded
the complaint which is filed directly in court under
S3 R110 with the complaint for preliminary
investigation/examination under S3[a] R112. Since
the complaint is being filed with the proper officer
for preliminary investigation/examination, it is not
required that it be subscribed by the offended party,
peace officer or public officer.

Q.

State the provision on the filing of an information.

A.

An information, charging a person with a violation of an
environmental law and subscribed by the prosecutor,
shall be filed with the court. (S2 R9 RPEC).
1030

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Q.

Is the civil action for the recovery of the civil
liability arising from the offense charged
deemed instituted with the criminal action?

A.

Yes, when a criminal action is instituted, the civil
action for the recovery of civil liability arising from
the offense charged, shall be deemed instituted
with the criminal action unless the complainant
waives the civil action, reserves the right to institute
it separately or institutes the civil action prior to the
criminal action.

Q.

When should the reservation of the right to
institute the civil action be made?

A.

Unless the civil action has been instituted prior to
the criminal action, the reservation of the right to
institute separately the civil action shall be made
during arraignment.

Q.

Are docket fees required to be paid in case the
civil action for the recovery of the civil liability
is deemed instituted with the criminal action?

A.

No. However in case civil liability is imposed or
damages are awarded, the filing and other legal
fees shall be imposed on said award in accordance
with Rule 141 of the Rules of Court, and the fees
shall constitute a first lien on the judgment award.

Q.

To whom will the damages awarded accrue in
case there is no private offended party?

A.

The damages awarded in cases where there is no
private offended party, less the filing fees, shall
accrue to the funds of the agency charged with the
implementation of the environmental law violated.
The award shall be used for the restoration and
rehabilitation of the environment adversely affected.
1031

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

When may a warrantless arrest be lawfully made?

A.

A peace officer or an individual deputized by the
proper government agency may, without a warrant,
arrest a person:
(a)

When, in his presence, the person to be
arrested has committed, is actually committing
or is attempting to commit an offense; or

(b) When an offense has just been committed, and
he has probable cause to believe based on
personal knowledge of facts or circumstances
that the person to be arrested has committed it.
Individuals deputized by the proper government
agency who are enforcing environmental laws shall
enjoy the presumption of regularity under Section
3(m), Rule 131 of the Rules of Court when effecting
arrests for violations of environmental laws.
Note: Compare with S5 R113 which allows a
private person to make a warrantless arrest.
Q.

What is the procedure in the custody and
disposition of seized items?

A.

The custody and disposition of seized items shall be
in accordance with the applicable laws or rules
promulgated by the concerned government agency.
In the absence of such applicable laws or
rules, the following procedure shall be observed:
a) The apprehending officer having initial custody
and control of the seized items, equipment,
paraphernalia, conveyances and instruments shall
physically inventory and whenever practicable,

1032

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

photograph the same in the presence of the
person from whom such items were seized.
b) Thereafter, the apprehending officer shall
submit to the issuing court the return of the
search warrant within five (5) days from date of
seizure or in case of warrantless arrest, submit
within five (5) days from date of seizure, the
inventory report, compliance report, photographs,
representative samples and other pertinent
documents to the public prosecutor for
appropriate action.
c) Upon motion by any interested party, the court
may direct the auction sale of seized items,
equipment, paraphernalia, tools or instruments
of the crime. The court shall, after hearing, fix
the minimum bid price based on the
recommendation of the concerned government
agency. The sheriff shall conduct the auction.
d) The auction sale shall be with notice to the
accused, the person from whom the items were
seized, or the owner thereof and the concerned
government agency.
e) The notice of auction shall be posted in three
conspicuous places in the city or municipality
where the items, equipment, paraphernalia,
tools or instruments of the crime were seized.
f ) . The proceeds shall be held in trust and
deposited with the government depository bank
for disposition according to the judgment.

1033

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Where is bail filed?

A.

Bail in the amount fixed may be filed with the court
where the case is pending, or in the absence or
unavailability of the judge thereof, with any regional
trial judge, metropolitan trial judge, municipal trial
judge or municipal circuit trial judge in the province,
city or municipality. If the accused is arrested in a
province, city or municipality other than where the
case is pending, bail may also be filed with any
Regional Trial Court of said place, or if no judge
thereof is available, with any metropolitan trial
judge, municipal trial judge or municipal circuit trial
judge therein. If the court grants bail, the court may
issue a hold-departure order in appropriate cases.

Q.

What are the duties of the court before granting
the application for bail?

A.

Before granting the application for bail, the judge
must read the information in a language known to
and understood by the accused and require the
accused to sign a written undertaking, as follows:
a) To appear before the court that issued the
warrant of arrest for arraignment purposes on
the date scheduled, and if the accused fails to
appear without justification on the date of
arraignment, accused waives the reading of the
information and authorizes the court to enter a
plea of not guilty on behalf of the accused and
to set the case for trial;
b) To appear whenever required by the court
where the case is pending; and

1034

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

c) To waive the right of the accused to be present
at the trial, and upon failure of the accused to
appear without justification and despite due
notice, the trial may proceed in absentia.
Q.

When shall the court set the arraignment?

A.

The court shall set the arraignment of the accused
within fifteen (15) days from the time it acquires
jurisdiction over the accused, with notice to the
public prosecutor and offended party or concerned
government agency that it will entertain plea
bargaining on the date of the arraignment.

Q.

What is plea-bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the
prosecutor in a criminal case work out a mutually
satisfactory disposition of the case subject to court
approval. It usually involves the defendants pleading
guilty to a lesser offense or to only one or some of
the counts of a multi-count indictment in return for a
lighter sentence than that for the graver charge.
(Blacks Law Dictionary, 5th ed., 1979).

Q.

When shall the court consider plea-bargaining
arrangements? What shall the court do if the
prosecution and offended party or concerned
government agency agree to the plea offered by
the accused?

A.

On the scheduled date of arraignment, the court
shall consider plea-bargaining arrangements.
Where the prosecution and offended party or
concerned government agency agree to the plea
offered by the accused, the court shall:
a) Issue an order which
bargaining arrived at;
1035

contains

the

plea

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

b) Proceed to receive evidence on the civil aspect
of the case, if any; and
c) Render and promulgate judgment of conviction,
including the civil liability for damages.
Q.

When shall the court set the pre-trial conference?

A.

After the arraignment, the court shall set the pre
trial conference within thirty (30) days. It may refer
the case to the branch clerk of court, if warranted,
for a preliminary conference to be set at least three
(3) days prior to the pre-trial.

Q.

What are the purposes of the preliminary
conference?

A.

The preliminary conference
following purposes:

shall

be

for

the

a) To assist the parties in reaching a settlement of
the civil aspect of the case;
b) To mark the documents to be presented as
exhibits;
c) To attach copies thereof to the records after
comparison with the originals;
d) To ascertain from the parties the undisputed facts
and admissions on the genuineness and due
execution of documents marked as exhibits;
e) To consider such other matters as may aid in
the prompt disposition of the case;
f)

To record the proceedings during the preliminary
conference in the Minutes of Preliminary
Conference to be signed by the parties
and counsel;
1036

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

g) To mark the affidavits of witnesses which shall
be in question and answer form and shall
constitute the direct examination of the
witnesses; and
h) To attach the Minutes and marked exhibits to
the case record before the pre-trial proper.
The parties or their counsel must submit to the
branch clerk of court the names, addresses and
contact numbers of the affiants.
Q.

What is the duty of the court during the pre-trial?

A.

During the pre-trial, the court shall:
a) Place the parties and their counsels under oath;
b) Adopt the minutes of the preliminary conference
as part of the pre-trial proceedings, confirm
markings of exhibits or substituted photocopies
and admissions on the genuineness and due
execution of documents, and list object and
testimonial evidence;
c) Scrutinize the information and the statements in
the affidavits and other documents which form
part of the record of the preliminary investigation
together with other documents identified and
marked as exhibits to determine further
admissions of facts as to:
i) The courts territorial jurisdiction relative to
the offense(s) charged;
ii) Qualification of expert witnesses; and
iii) Amount of damages;

1037

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

d) Define factual and legal issues;
e) Ask parties to agree on the specific trial dates
and adhere to the flow chart determined by the
court which shall contain the time frames for the
different stages of the proceeding up to
promulgation of decision;
f) Require the parties to submit to the branch clerk
of court the names, addresses and contact
numbers of witnesses that need to be
summoned by subpoena; and
g) Consider modification of order of trial if the
accused admits the charge but interposes a
lawful defense.
Q.

In what form shall the agreements and admissions
made or entered during the pre-trial be?

A.

All agreements or admissions made or entered
during the pre-trial conference shall be reduced in
writing and signed by the accused and counsel;
otherwise, they cannot be used against the
accused. The agreements covering the matters
referred to in Section 1, Rule 118 of the Rules of
Court shall be approved by the court.

Q.

In case of conviction and subsidiary liability is
allowed under the law, how will such subsidiary
liability be enforced?

A.

In case of conviction of the accused and subsidiary
liability is allowed by law, the court may, by motion
of the person entitled to recover under judgment,
enforce such subsidiary liability against a person or
corporation subsidiarily liable under Article 1Q2 and
Article 103 of the Revised Penal Code.
1038

J9JC9B0M

Rules Of Procedure For
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Evidence
Q.

What is the precautionary principle?

A.

It is the principle which states that when human
activities may lead to threats of serious and
irreversible damage to the environment that is
scientifically plausible but uncertain, the court shall
take actions to avoid or diminish that threat
notwithstanding that there is a lack of full scientific
certainty in establishing a causal link between
human activity and environmental effect.
The constitutional right of the people to a
balanced and healthful ecology shall be given the
benefit of the doubt. The burden of proof is shifted
from the regulator to the person or persons
responsible for the potentially harmful activity, who
will now have to demonstrate that their actions are
not/will not cause harm to the environment.
The principle addresses the fact that
complexities associated with environmental cases
will present difficulties under the regular rules of
procedure. Overall, the precautionary principle
would essentially aid plaintiffs in establishing cases
that would be, under most circumstances, difficult if
not impossible to prove.

Q.

What are the standards for the application of
the precautionary principle?

A.

In applying the precautionary principle, the following
factors, among others, may be considered: (1)
threats to human life or health; (2) inequity to
present or future generations; or (3) prejudice to the
environment without legal consideration of the
environmental rights of those affected.
1039

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Q.

Howare photographic,
evidence authenticated?

A.

Photographs, videos and
similar evidence of
events, acts, transactions of wildlife, wildlife by
products or derivatives, forest products or mineral
resources subject of a case shall be admissible
when authenticated by the person who took the
same, by some other person present when said
evidence was taken, or by any other person
competent to testify on the accuracy thereof.

Q.

Are entries in official records prima facie
evidence of the facts therein stated?

A.

Yes. Entries in official records made in the
performance of his duty by a public officer of the
Philippines, or by a person in performance of a duty
specially enjoined by law, are prima facie evidence
of the facts therein stated.
SO

1040

video, and

similar

J9JC9B0M

APPENDICES

J9JC9B0M

J9JC9B0M

APPENDIX A
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
SUPREME COURT
Manila

JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE
A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC
Whereas, case congestion and delays plague most
courts in cities, given the huge volume of cases filed each
year and the slow and cumbersome adversarial system
that the judiciary has in place;
Whereas, about 40% of criminal cases are dismissed
annually owing to the fact that complainants simply give up
coming to court after repeated postponements;
Whereas, few foreign businessmen take long-term
investments in the Philippines because its courts are
unable to provide ample and speedy protection to their
investments, keeping its people poor;
Whereas, in order to reduce the time needed for
completing the testimonies of witnesses in cases under
litigation, on February 21, 2012 the Supreme Court
approved for piloting by trial courts in Quezon City the
compulsory use of judicial affidavits in place of the direct
testimonies of witnesses;
Whereas, it is reported that such piloting has quickly
resulted in reducing by about two-thirds the time used for
presenting the testimonies of witnesses, thus speeding up
the hearing and adjudication of cases;
Whereas, the Supreme Court Committee on the
Revision of the Rules of Court, headed by Senior
Associate Justice Antonio T. Carpio, and the Sub1043

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Committee on the Revision of the Rules on Civil
Procedure, headed by Associate Justice Roberto A. Abad,
have recommended for adoption a Judicial Affidavit Rule
that will replicate nationwide the success of the Quezon
City experience in the use of judicial affidavits; and
Whereas, the Supreme Court En Banc finds merit in
the recommendation;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Supreme Court En Banc
hereby issues and promulgates the following:
Section 1. Scope. - (a) This Rule shall apply to all
actions, proceedings, and incidents requiring the reception
of evidence before:
(1) The Metropolitan Trial Courts, the Municipal Trial
Courts in Cities, the Municipal Trial Courts, the Municipal
Circuit Trial Courts, and the Shari' a Circuit Courts but shall
not apply to small claims cases under A.M. 08-8-7-SC;
(2) The Regional Trial Courts and the Shari' a District
Courts;
(3) The Sandiganbayan, the Court of Tax Appeals,
the Court of Appeals, and the Shari' a Appellate Courts;
(4) The investigating officers and bodies authorized
by the Supreme Court to receive evidence, including the
Integrated Bar of the Philippine (IBP); and
(5) The special courts and quasi-judicial bodies,
whose rules of procedure are subject to disapproval of the
Supreme Court, insofar as their existing rules of procedure
contravene the provisions of this Rule.*

*By virtue of the Supreme Courts authority under Section 5(5), Article VIII
of the 1987 Constitution to disapprove rules of procedure of special courts and
quasi-judicial bodies.

1044

J9JC9B0M

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)

(b)
For the purpose of brevity, the above courts,
quasi-judicial bodies, or investigating officers shall be
uniformly referred to here as the "court."
Sec. 2. Submission of Judicial Affidavits and
Exhibits in lieu of direct testimonies. - (a) The parties
shall file with the court and serve on the adverse party,
personally or by licensed courier service, not later than five
days before pre-trial or preliminary conference or the
scheduled hearing with respect to motions and incidents,
the following:
(1) The judicial affidavits of their witnesses, which shall
take the place of such witnesses' direct testimonies; and
(2) The parties' documentary or object evidence, if
any, which shall be attached to the judicial affidavits and
marked as Exhibits A, B, C, and so on in the case of the
complainant or the plaintiff, and as Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and so
on in the case of the respondent or the defendant.
(b) Should a party or a witness desire to keep the
original document or object evidence in his possession, he
may, after the same has been identified, marked as exhibit,
and authenticated, warrant in his judicial affidavit that the
copy or reproduction attached to such affidavit is a faithful
copy or reproduction of that original. In addition, the party
or witness shall bring the original document or object
evidence for comparison during the preliminary conference
with the attached copy, reproduction, or pictures, failing
which the latter shall not be admitted.
This is without prejudice to the introduction of
secondary evidence in place of the original when allowed
by existing rules.
Sec. 3. Contents of Judicial Affidavit. - A judicial
affidavit shall be prepared in the language known to the
witness and, if not in English or Filipino, accompanied by a
translation in English or Filipino, and shall contain the following:
1045

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(a) The name, age, residence or business address,
and occupation of the witness;
(b) The name and address of the lawyer who
conducts or supervises the examination of the witness and
the place where the examination is being held;
(c) A statement that the witness is answering the
questions asked of him, fully conscious that he does so
under oath, and that he may face criminal liability for false
testimony or perjury;
(d) Questions asked of the witness and his
corresponding answers, consecutively numbered, that:
(1) Show the circumstances under which the witness
acquired the facts upon which he testifies;
(2) Elicit from him those facts which are relevant to
the issues that the case presents; and
(3) Identify the attached documentary and object
evidence and establish their authenticity in accordance
with the Rules of Court;
(e) The signature of the witness over his printed
name; and
(f) A jurat with the signature of the notary public who
administers the oath or an officer who is authorized by law
to administer the same.
Sec. 4. Sworn attestation o f the lawyer. - (a) The
judicial affidavit shall contain a sworn attestation at the
end, executed by the lawyer who conducted or supervised
the examination of the -witness, to the effect that:
(1) He faithfully recorded or caused to be recorded
the questions he asked and the corresponding answers
that the witness gave; and
1046

J9JC9B0M

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)

(2) Neither he nor any other person then present or
assisting him coached the witness regarding the latter's
answers.
(b) A false attestation shall subject the lawyer
mentioned to disciplinary action, including disbarment.
Sec. 5. Subpoena, - If the government employee or
official, or the requested witness, who is neither the
witness of the adverse party nor a hostile witness,
unjustifiably declines to execute a judicial affidavit or
refuses without just cause to make the relevant books,
documents, or other things under his control available for
copying, authentication, and eventual production in court,
the requesting party may avail himself of the issuance of a
subpoena ad testificandum or duces tecum under Rule 21
of the Rules of Court. The rules governing the issuance of
a subpoena to the witness in this case shall be the same
as when taking his deposition except that the taking of a
judicial affidavit shall be understood to be ex parte.
Sec. 6. Offer of and objections to testimony in
judicial affidavit- The party presenting the judicial affidavit
of his witness in place of direct testimony shall state the
purpose of such testimony at the start of the presentation of
the witness. The adverse party may move to disqualify the
witness or to strike out his affidavit or any of the answers
found in it on ground of inadmissibility. The court shall
promptly rule on the motion and, if granted, shall cause the
marking of any excluded answer by placing it in brackets
under the initials of an authorized court personnel, without
prejudice to a tender of excluded evidence under Section 40
of Rule 132 of the Rules of Court.
Sec. 7. Examination of the witness on his judicial
affidavit. - The adverse party shall have the right to crossexamine the witness on his judicial affidavit and on the
exhibits attached to the same. The party who presents the
witness may also examine him as on re-direct. In every
1047

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

case, the court shall take active part in examining the
witness to determine his credibility as well as the truth of
his testimony and to elicit the answers that it needs for
resolving the issues.
Sec. 8. Oral offer of and objections to exhibits. (a) Upon the termination of the testimony of his last
witness, a party shall immediately make an oral offer of
evidence of his documentary or object exhibits, piece by
piece, in their chronological order, stating the purposeor
purposes for which he offers the particular exhibit.
(b) After each piece of exhibit is offered, the adverse
party shall state the legal ground for his objection, if any, to
its admission, and the court shall immediately make its
ruling respecting that exhibit.
(c) Since the documentary or object exhibits form part
of the judicial affidavits that describe and authenticate
them, it is sufficient that such exhibits are simply cited by
their markings during the offers, the objections, and the
rulings, dispensing with the description of each exhibit.
Sec. 9. Application of rule to criminal actions. - (a)
This rule shall apply to all criminal actions:
(1) Where the maximum of the imposable penalty
does not exceed six years;
(2) Where the accused agrees to the use of judicial
affidavits, irrespective of the penalty involved; or
(3) With respect to the civil aspect of the actions,
whatever the penalties involved are.
(b) The prosecution shall submit the judicial affidavits
of its witnesses not later than five days before the pre-trial,
serving copies of the same upon the accused. The
complainant or public prosecutor shall attach to the
affidavits such documentary or object evidence as he may
1048

J9JC9B0M

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)

have, marking them as Exhibits A, B, C, and so on. No
further judicial affidavit, documentary, or object evidence
shall be admitted at the trial.
(c)
If the accused desires to be heard on his defense
after receipt of the judicial affidavits of the prosecution, he
shall have the option to submit his judicial affidavit as well
as those of his witnesses to the court within ten days from
receipt of such affidavits and serve a copy of each on the
public and private prosecutor, including his documentary
and object evidence previously marked as Exhibits 1, 2, 3,
and so on. These affidavits shall serve as direct
testimonies of the accused and his witnesses when they
appear before the court to testify.
Sec. 10. Effect o f non-compliance with the
Judicial A ffidavit Rule. - (a) A party who fails to submit
the required judicial affidavits and exhibits on time shall be
deemed to have waived their submission. The court may,
however, allow only once the late submission of the same
provided, the delay is for a valid reason, would not unduly
prejudice the opposing party, and the defaulting party pays
a fine of not less than P1,000 nor more than P5.000, at the
discretion of the court.
(b) The court shall not consider the affidavit of any
witness who fails to appear at the scheduled hearing of the
case as required. Counsel who fails to appear without valid
cause despite notice shall be deemed to have waived his
client's right to confront by cross-examination the
witnesses there present.
(c) The court shall not admit as evidence judicial
affidavits that do not conform to the content requirements
of Section 3 and the attestation requirement of Section 4
above. The court may, however, allow only once the
subsequent submission of the compliant replacement
affidavits before the hearing or trial provided the delay is
for a valid reason and would not unduly prejudice the
1049

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

opposing party and provided further, that public or private
counsel responsible for their preparation and submission
pays a fine of not less than P1,000 nor more than P5,000,
at the discretion of the court.
Sec. 11. Repeal or modification o f inconsistent
rules. - The provisions of the Rules of Court and the rules
of procedure governing investigating officers and bodies
authorized by the Supreme Court to receive evidence are
repealed or modified insofar as these are inconsistent with
the provisions of this Rule. The rules of procedure
governing quasi-judicial bodies inconsistent herewith are
hereby disapproved.
Sec. 12. Effectivity.- This rule shall take effect on
January 1, 2013 following its publication in two newspapers
of general circulation not later than September 15, 2012. It
shall also apply to existing cases.
Manila, September 4, 2012.

1050

J9JC9B0M

APPENDIX B
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
SUPREME COURT
Manila

EFFICIENT USE OF PAPER RULE
A.M. No. 11-9-4-SC
Whereas, to produce 500 reams of paper, twenty
trees are cut and 100,000 liters of water are used, water
that is no longer reusable because it is laden with
chemicals and is just released to the environment to
poison our rivers and seas;
Whereas, there is a need to cut the judicial system's
use of excessive quantities of costly paper, save our
forests, avoid landslides, and mitigate the worsening
effects of climate change that the world is expenencing;
Whereas, the judiciary can play a big part in saving our
trees, conserving precious water, and helping mother earth;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Supreme Court En Banc
hereby issues and promulgates the following:
Sec. 1. Title o f the Rule. - This rule shall be known
and cited as the Efficient Use of Paper Rule.
Sec. 2. Applicability. - This rule shall apply to all
courts and quasi-judicial bodies under the administrative
supervision of the Supreme Court.
Sec. 3. Format and Style. - a) All pleadings, motions,
and similar papers intended for the court and quasi-judicial
body's consideration and action (court-bound papers) shall
be written in single space with a one-and-a-half space
between paragraphs, using an easily readable font style of
1051

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

the party's choice, of 14-size font, and on a 13-inch by 8.5inch white bond paper; and
b)
All decisions, resolutions, and orders issued by courts
and by quasi-judicial bodies under the administrative
supervision of the Supreme Court shall comply with these
requirements. Similarly covered are the reports submitted to
the courts and transcripts of stenographic notes.
Sec. 4. Margins and Prints. - The parties shall
maintain the following margins on all court-bound papers: a
left hand margin of 1.5 inches from the edge; an upper
margin of 1.2 inches from the edge; a right hand margin of
1.0 inch from the edge; and a lower margin of 1.0 inch from
the edge. Every page must be consecutively numbered.
Sec. 5. Copies to be Filed. - Unless otherwise
directed by the court, the number of court-bound papers
that a party is required or desires to file shall be as follows:
a) In the Supreme Court, one original (properly
marked) and four copies, unless the case is referred to the
Court En Banc, in which event, the parties shall file ten
additional copies. For the En Banc, the parties need to
submit only two sets of annexes, one attached to the
original and an extra copy. For the Division, the parties
need to submit also two sets of annexes, one attached to
the original and an extra copy. All members of the Court
shall share the extra copies of annexes in the interest of
economy of paper.
Parties to cases before the Supreme Court are further
required, on voluntary basis for the first six months
following the effectivity of this Rule and compulsorily
afterwards unless the period is extended, to submit,
simultaneously with their court-bound papers, soft copies
of the same and their annexes (the latter in PDF format)
either by email to the Court's e-mail address or by compact
disc (CD). This requirement is in preparation for the
1052

J9JC9B0M

Appendix B
Efficient Use Of Paper Rule
(A.M. No. 11-9-4-SC)

eventual establishment of an e-filing paperless system in
the judiciary.
b) In the Court of Appeals and the Sandiganbayan,
one original (properly marked) and two copies with their
annexes;
c) In the Court of Tax Appeals, one original (properly
marked) and two copies with annexes. On appeal to the
En Banc, one original (properly marked) and eight copies
with annexes; and
d) In other courts, one original (properly marked) with
the stated annexes attached to it.
Sec. 6. Annexes Served on Adverse Party. - A
party required by the rules to serve a copy of his courtbound paper on the adverse party need not enclose copies
of those annexes that based on the record of the court
such party already has in his possession. In the event a
party requests a set of the annexes actually filed with the
court, the party who filed the paper shall comply with the
request within five days from receipt.
Sec. 7. Date o f Effectivity. -This rule shall take effect
on January 1, 2013 after publication in two newspapers of
general circulation in the Philippines.
Manila, November 13, 2012.

1053

J9JC9B0M

APPENDIX C
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR
CONTINUOUS TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES*
I.

Applicability

The Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases (Revised Guidelines) shall apply to all
newly-filed criminal cases, including those governed by
Special Laws and Rules,185 in the First and Second Level
Courts, the Sandiganbayan and the Court of Tax Appeals
as of effectivity date. The Revised Guidelines shall also
apply to pending criminal cases with respect to the
remainder of the proceedings.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the
Revised Guidelines shall not apply to criminal cases filed
under the Rule on Summary Procedure.
II.

Objectives

1) To proiect and advance the constitutional right of
persons to a speedy disposition of their criminal cases;
2) To reinforce and give teeth to the existing rules
on criminal procedure and other special rules prescribing
periods for court action and those which promote speedy
disposition of criminal cases; and
3) To introduce innovations and best practices for
the benefit of the parties.
* References to annexes are omitted.
,85Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002, Cybercrime Prevention
Act of 2012, Rules of Procedure for Environmental Cases, Rules of Procedure for
Intellectual Property Rights Cases, and Criminal Cases cognizable by Family
Courts and Commercial Courts.

1054

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

III.

Procedure
1) Hearing Days and Calendar Call

Trial shall be held from Monday to Thursday, and
courts shall call the cases at exactly 8:30 A.M. and 2:00
P.M., pursuant to Administrative Circular No. 3-99. Hearing
on motions, arraignment and pre-trial, and promulgation of
decisions shall be held in the morning of Fridays, pursuant
to Sec. 7, Rule 15 of the Rules of Court.
All courts shall ensure the posting of their court
calendars outside their courtrooms at least one (1) day
before the scheduled hearings, pursuant to OCA Circular
No. 250-2015.
2) Motions
(a) Motion for Inhibition - Motions for inhibition
based on grounds provided for under Rule 137 shall be
resolved immediately or within two (2) calendar days from
date of their filing.
(b) Prohibited Motions - Prohibited motions shall be
denied outright before the scheduled arraignment without
need of comment and/or opposition.
The following motions are prohibited:
i. Motion for judicial determination of probable cause.
ii. Motion for preliminary investigation filed beyond the
five (5)-day reglementary period in inquest proceedings
under Sec. 6, Rule 112, or when preliminary investigation
is required under Sec. 8, Rule 112, or allowed in inquest
proceedings and the accused failed to participate in the
preliminary investigation despite due notice.
iii. Motion for reinvestigation of the prosecutor
recommending the filing of information once the
1055

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

information has been filed before the court (1) if the
motion is filed without prior leave of court; (2) when
preliminary investigation is not required under Sec. 8,
Rule 112; and (3) when the regular preliminary
investigation is required and has been actually
conducted, and the grounds relied upon in the motion
are not meritorious, such as issues of credibility,
admissibility of evidence, innocence of the accused, or
lack of due process when the accused was actually
notified, among others.
iv. Motion to quash information when the ground is
not one of those stated in Sec. 3, Rule 117.
v. Motion for bill of particulars that does not conform
to Sec. 9, Rule 116.
vi. Motion to suspend the arraignment based on
grounds not stated under Sec. 11, Rule 116.
vii. Petition to suspend the criminal action on the
ground of prejudicial question, when no civil case has
been filed, pursuant to Sec. 7, Rule 111.
(c) Meritorious Motions - Motions that allege
plausible grounds supported by relevant documents and/or
competent evidence, except those that are already
covered by the Revised Guidelines, are meritorious
motions, such as:
i. Motion to withdraw information, or to downgrade
the charge in the original information, or to exclude an
accused originally charged therein, filed by the
prosecution as a result of a reinvestigation,
reconsideration, and review;
ii. Motion to quash warrant of arrest;
iii. Motion to suspend arraignment on the ground of an
unsound mental condition under Sec. 11 (a), Rule 116;
1056

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

iv. Motion to suspend proceedings on the ground of a
prejudicial question where a civil case was filed prior to
the criminal case under Sec. 11 (b), Rule 116;
v. Motion to quash information on the grounds that the
facts charged do not constitute an offense, lack of
jurisdiction, extinction of criminal action or liability, or double
jeopardy under Sec. 3, par. (a), (b), (g), and (i), Rule 117;
vi. Motion to discharge accused as a state witness
under Sec. 17, Rule 119;
vii. Motion to quash search warrant under Sec. 14,
Rule 126, or motion to suppress evidence; and
viii. Motion to dismiss on the ground that the criminal
case is a Strategic Law Suit Against Public Participation
(SLAPP) under Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases.
The comment of the adverse party shall be filed within
a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days from
notice/receipt of the order of the court to file the same, and
the court shall resolve the motion within a non-extendible
period of ten (10) calendar days from the expiration of the
ten (10)-day period, with or without comment. The court, at
its discretion, may set the motion for hearing within a nonextendible period of ten (10) calendar days from the
expiration of the ten (10)-day period to file comment, in
which case the same shall be submitted for resolution after
the termination of the hearing, and shall be resolved within a
non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days thereafter.
Reply and memorandum need not be submitted.
In case of a motion to discharge accused as state
witness under Sec. 17, Rule 119, where the prosecution is
required to present evidence in support thereof, such
motion shall be submitted for resolution from the
termination of the hearing, and shall be resolved within a
non-extendible period often (10) calendar days thereafter.
1057

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The motion for reconsideration of the resolution of a
meritorious motion shall be filed within a non-extendible
period of five (5) calendar days from receipt of such
resolution, and the adverse party shall be given an equal
period of five (5) calendar days from receipt of the motion
for reconsideration within which to submit its comment.
Thereafter, the motion for reconsideration shall be resolved
by the court within a non-extendible period of five (5)
calendar days from the expiration of the five (5)-day period
to submit the comment.
Motions that do not conform to the requirements
stated above shall be considered unmeritorious and shall
be denied outright.
(d) Motion for postponement - A motion for
postponement is prohibited, except if it is based on acts of
God, force majeure or physical inability of the witness to
appear and testify. If the motion is granted based on such
exceptions, the moving party shall be warned that the
presentation of its evidence must still be finished on the
dates previously agreed upon.
A motion for postponement, whether written or oral,
shall at all times be accompanied by the original official
receipt from the Office of the Clerk of Court evidencing
payment of the postponement fee under Sec. 21 (b), Rule
141, to be submitted either at the time of the filing of said
motion or not later than the next hearing date. The Clerk of
Court shall not accept the motion unless accompanied by
the original receipt.
3) Free Legal Assistance
If a party fails to qualify for the availment of the
services of the Public Attorneys Office, the Integrated Bar
of the Philippines Local Chapter shall provide free legal
assistance to said party. For this purpose, the IBP Local
Chapter shall submit to the Executive Judges a list of IBP1058

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

local lawyers who may be appointed by the courts to act as
counsel de officio in such cases. The lists shall be
disseminated among all the trial courts in the station.
4) Private Prosecutor
In cases where only the civil liability is being
prosecuted by a private prosecutor, the head of the
prosecution office must issue in favor of the private
prosecutor a written authority to try the case even in the
absence of the public prosecutor. The written authority
must be submitted to the court prior to the presentation of
evidence by the private prosecutor in accordance with Sec.
5, Rule 110.
With this authority on record, the court may set the
trial in the case and in other cases tried by private
prosecutor with delegated authority on separate days
when the presence of the public prosecutor may be
dispensed with.
5) Consolidations
(a) Newly-filed Cases - When newly-filed criminal
cases involving offenses based on the same facts or forming
part of a series of offenses of similar character, are
accompanied by a motion for consolidation filed by the Office
of the Prosecutor, the Executive Judge shall cause the raffle
to only one court which shall then resolve said motion for
consolidation, preferably on the date of the arraignment and
in the presence of the accused and counsel.
(b) Pending Cases with Multiple Accused - In cases
involving multiple accused where a subsequent information
is filed involving an accused who has been subjected to
further investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor over an
incident which has the same subject matter as a prior
information/s against different accused, said subsequent
case when filed accompanied by a motion for consolidation
from the Office of the Prosecutor shall no longer be raffled.
1059

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

The subsequent case shall be assigned directly by the
Executive Judge to the court where the earlier case is
pending. If the earlier case is already at the trial stage and
witnesses have been presented, the parties may be
allowed to adopt the evidence so far presented, without
prejudice to additional direct examination questions and
cross examination questions.
6)

Archiving of Cases

The archiving of cases shall be done within the period
prescribed under the Guidelines in the Archiving of Cases
under SC Administrative Circular No. 7-A-92, as restated in
OCA Circular No. 89-2004. A criminal case shall be
archived only if, after the issuance of the warrant of arrest,
the accused remains at large for six (6) months from the
delivery of the warrant to the proper peace officer. Such
case shall likewise be archived when proceedings therein
are ordered suspended for an indefinite period because:
(a) the accused appears to be suffering from an
unsound mental condition which effectively renders him
unable to fully understand the charge against him and to
plead intelligently, or to undergo trial, and he has to be
committed to a mental hospital;
(b) a valid prejudicial question in a civil action is
invoked during the pendency of the criminal case, unless
the civil and criminal cases are consolidated;
(c) an interlocutory order or incident in the criminal
case is elevated to, and is pending resolution/decision for
an indefinite period before a higher court which has issued
a temporary restraining order or writ of preliminary
injunction; and
(d) when the accused has jumped bail before
arraignment and cannot be arrested by the bondsman.

1060

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

7) Revival of Provisionally Dismissed Cases.
Revival of provisionally dismissed cases shall
conform to the requisites and the periods provided for
under Sec. 8, Rule 117. Provisional dismissal of offenses
punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) years or
a fine of any amount or both shall become permanent one
(1) year after issuance of the order without the case having
been revived. Provisional dismissal of offenses punishable
by imprisonment of more than six (6) years, shall become
permanent two (2) years after the issuance of the order
without the case having been revived.
8) Arraignment and Pre-trial
(a) Schedule of Arraignment and Pre-trial - Once the
court has acquired jurisdiction over the person of the
accused, the arraignment of the accused and the pre-trial
shall be set within ten (10) calendar days from date of the
courts receipt of the case for a detained accused, and
within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the court
acquires jurisdiction (either by arrest or voluntary surrender)
over a non-detained accused, unless a shorter period is
provided by special law or Supreme Court circular.
The court must set the arraignment of the accused in
the commitment order, in the case of detained accused, or
in the order of approval of bail, in any other case. For this
purpose, where the Executive Judge and Pairing Judges
act on bail applications in cases assigned to other courts,
they shall coordinate with the courts to which the cases are
actually assigned for scheduling purposes.
(b) Notice of Arraignment and Pre-Trial - Notice of
arraignment and pre-trial shall be sent to the accused,
his/her counsel, private complainant or complaining law
enforcement agent, public prosecutor, and witnesses
whose names appear in the information for purposes of
plea-bargaining, arraignment and pre-trial.
1061

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(c) Waiver of Reading of the Information - In
multiple cases, the court, upon personal examination of the
accused, may allow a waiver of the reading of the
information upon the full understanding and express
consent of the accused and his/her counsel, which consent
shall be expressly stated in both the minutes/certificate or
arraignment and the order of arraignment. The court shall
explain the waiver to the accused in the language or
dialect known to him/her, and ensure the accuseds full
understanding of the consequences of the waiver before
approving the same.
(d) Arraignment Proper
i. Plea Bargaining Except in Drug Cases - If the
accused desires to enter a plea of guilty to a lesser
offense, plea bargaining shall immediately proceed,
provided the private offended party in private crimes, or
the arresting officer in victimless crimes, is present to
give his/her consent with the conformity of the public
prosecutor to the plea bargaining. Thereafter, judgment
shall be immediately rendered in the same proceedings.
ii. Plea of Guilty to the Crime Charged in the
Information - If the accused pleads guilty to the crime
charged in the information, judgment shall be
immediately rendered, except in those cases involving
capital punishment.
iii. Where No Plea Bargaining or Plea of Guilty Takes
Place - If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty,
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense charged in
the information, the court shall immediately proceed with
the arraignment and the pre-trial.
The schedule of the trial dates, for both the
prosecution and the accused, shall be continuous and
within the periods provided in the Regular Rules/Special
Rules. The trial dates may be shortened depending on the
1062

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(AM. No. 15-06-10-SC)

number of witnesses to be presented. In this regard, a
flowchart shall be prepared by the court which shall serve
as the final schedule of hearings.
Sample Flowcharts
A. Regular Rules
;

\
Arraignment and
Pre-Trial

30 days

v________________ ,

\

Presentation o f the
Prosecution s and the
Accuseds Evidence
(6 months/180 days)
V______________________

Promulgation of
Decision (90 days from
submission of case for
decision)

B. Special Laws/Rules
1. Drug Cases
f ------------------------------------------------------------- \

Trial (To be finished
not later than 60
days from filing of
Information)

Decision (15 days
from submission of
case for resolution)
v________________________

2. Environmental Cases
A rraignm ent and
Pre-Trial

30 days

1063

Trial
(3 months)

J

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

/



V

Decision
(60 days from last day
to file m em oranda)

Memo
30 days

\___________________

Disposition period shall be within 10 months
from date o f arraignment

3. Intellectual Property Rights Cases
Arraignment and
Pre-Trial

Trial
(60 days for each party
to present evidence or
120 days)

30 days

v_
/

30 days

4.
Mediation

\

Judgm ent
(90 days from
subm ission o f case for
decision)
V___________________________

Arraignment and Pre-trial of Cases Referred to

1064

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

(e)
Arraignment and Preliminary Conference
Mediatable Cases subject to the Rule on Summary Procedure
The arraignment and preliminary conference shall be
simultaneously held, and the court shall take up all the
matters required under Sec. 14, Rule on Summary
Procedure during the preliminary conference.
i. If the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged in
the information, subheading III, item no. 8,
subparagraph (d) ii (Plea of Guilty to the Crime Charged
in the Information) shall be followed.
ii. If the accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense,
subheading III, item no. 8 subparagraph (d) i (Plea
Bargaining except in Drug Cases) shall be followed.
iii. If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty,
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense charged in
the information, the court shall immediately proceed with
the arraignment and the preliminary conference, and
thereafter refer the case to mediation.
Sample flow chart
Rule on Summary Procedure of Criminal Cases referred
to Mediation

Arraignment and
Preliminary
Conference

Trial
(60 days)

30 days
Mediation

>

1065

of

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

(f) Conduct of Pre-trial
i. Absence of parties - The court shall proceed with
the pre-trial despite the absence of the accused and/or
private complainant, provided they were duly notified of
the same, and the counsel for the accused, as well as
the public prosecutor, are present.
ii. Stipulations - Proposals for stipulations shall be
done with the active participation of the court itself and
shall not be left alone to the counsels.
iii. Marking of evidence - The documentary evidence
of the prosecution and the accused shall be marked.
iv. Pre-trial Order - The pre-trial Order shall
immediately be served upon the parties and counsel on
the same day after the termination of the pre-trial.
v. Compliance with the Rules - Courts must strictly
comply with the Guidelines to be Observed in the
Conduct of Pre-trial under A.M. No. 03-1-09-SC.
9. Mediation
(a)
The following cases shall be referred to mediation
on the civil liability unless a settlement is reached earlier in
the pre-trial/preliminary conference:
i. Crimes where payment may prevent criminal
prosecution or may extinguish criminal liability, such as
violations of:
a. B.P. Big. 22;
b. SSS Law (R.A. No. 1161, as amended by R.A.
No. 8282); and
c. PAG-IBIG Law (R.A. No. 9679).
ii. Crimes against property under Title 10 of the
Revised Penal Code (RPC), where the obligation may
1066

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

be civil in nature, such as:
a. Theft under Art. 308, RPC, cognizable by the
first level courts;
b. Estafa under Art. 315(1), RPC, except estafa
under Art. 315 (2) and (3);
c. Others forms of swindling under Art. 316, RPC;
d. Swindling of a minor under Art. 317, RPC;
e. Other deceits under Art. 318, RPC; and
f.

Malicious mischief under Art. 327, RPC.

iii.
Crimes against honor under Title 13, RPC, where
the liability may be civil in nature, such as:
a) Libel by means of writings or similar means
under Art. 355, RPC;
b) Threatening to publish and offer to present such
publication for a compensation under Art. 356, RPC;
c) Prohibited publication of acts referred to in the
course of official proceedings under Art. 357, RPC;
d) Grave Slander (Grave Oral Defamation) - of
serious and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 1, RPC;
e) Simple Slander (Oral Defamation) - not of a
serious and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 2, RPC;
f) Grave Slander by Deed - of a serious nature
under Art. 359, par. 1 RPC;
g) Simple Slander by Deed nature Art. 359, par. 2, RPC;

not of a serious

h) Incriminating innocent person under Art. 363, RPC;
i) Intriguing against honor under Art. 364, RPC;
1067

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

iv. Libel under R.A. 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention
Act of 2012) where the liability may be civil in nature;
v. Criminal negligence under Title 14, RPC, where the
liability may be civil in nature; and
vi. Intellectual property rights cases where the liability
may be civil in nature.
(b)
The referral of the case for mediation to the
Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit shall be made only
after the conduct of the arraignment and the pretrial/preliminary conference. The court shall serve the
Order of Referral to the PMC Unit immediately after the
arraignment and the pre-trial/preliminary conference.
The Mediation shall be terminated within a non
extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date
of referral by the court to the PMC Unit. After the lapse of
the mediation period or if mediation fails, trial shall proceed.
Except those cases mentioned above, criminal cases
subject to the Rule on Summary Procedure shall not be
referred to mediation.
10. Bail
(a) Petition for bail
Petition for bail filed after the filing of the information
shall be set for summary hearing after arraignment and
pre-trial. Testimony of a witness in petition for bail may be
in the form allowed by subheading III, item no. 11, par. B
(Form of Testimony) of the Revised Guidelines, provided
that the demeanor of the witness is not essential in
determining his/her credibility.
Petition for bail shall be heard and resolved within a
non-extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from
date of the first hearing, except in drug cases which shall
be heard and resolved within twenty (20) calendar days,
1068

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

without need of oral argument and submission of
memoranda, consistent with the summary nature of the
proceedings.
Motion for reconsideration on the resolution of petition
for bail shall be resolved within a non-extendible period of ten
(10) calendar days from date of submission of the motion.
Sample Flowcharts with Petition for Bail

A. Regular Rules
Arraignment and
Pre-Trial

Hearing and Resolution
of Petition for Bail (30
days)

30 days

Presentation of
Evidence-in-chief of the
Prosecution (60 days)
and Presentation of
Evidence of the
Accused (90 days)

Promulgation of
Decision (90 days
from submission of
case for decision)

Presentation of Evidence in the Petition for Bail and
Presentation of Evidence-in-chief of the Prosecution
and of Evidence f the Accused (160 days)

B. Drug C ases
\

Hearing and Resolution
of Petition for Bail (20
days) and Presentation of
Evidence-in-chief of the
Prosecution

Arraignment and
Pre-Trial (Within
10 days from filing
of information)

\ ______________ )

V_______ ~

1069

'______ /

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

\
Presentation of
Evidence of the
Accused (25 days)

Decision (15 days from
submission o f case for
resolution)

\ ___________________ /

Trial (To be finished not later than 60 days from
filing o f information

(b) Evidence in petition for bail
The resolution of petition for bail shall be based solely
on the evidence presented during the bail proceedings by
the prosecution. The prosecution shall present only pieces
of evidence that are essential in establishing that the
evidence of guilt is strong. The accused need not present
evidence to contradict or rebut the prosecutions evidence.
(c)

Non-suspension of the presentation of evidence

The court shall not suspend the presentation of the
evidence in chief while awaiting resolution of the petition
for bail or the motion for reconsideration.
11. Form of Testimony
(a) For First Level Courts
In all criminal cases, including those covered by the
Rule on Summary Procedure, the testimonies of witnesses
shall consist of the duly subscribed written statements
given to law enforcement or peace officers or the affidavits
or counter-affidavits submitted before the investigating
prosecutor, and if such are not available, testimonies shall
be in the form of judicial affidavits, subject to additional
direct and cross-examination questions.

1070

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

The trial prosecutor may dispense with the sworn
written statements submitted to the law enforcement or
peace officers and prepare the judicial affidavits of the
affiants or modify or revise the said sworn statements
before presenting it as evidence.
(b) For Second Level Courts, Sandiganbayan and
Court of Tax Appeals
In criminal cases where the demeanor of the witness
is not essential in determining the credibility of said
witness, such as forensic chemists, medico-legal officers,
investigators, auditors, accountants, engineers, custodians,
expert witnesses and other similar witnesses, who will
testify on the authenticity, due execution and the contents
of public documents and reports, and in criminal cases that
are transactional in character, such as falsification,
malversation, estafa, or other crimes where the culpability
or innocence of the accused can be established through
documents, the testimonies of the witnesses shall be the
duly subscribed written statements given to law
enforcement or peace officers or the affidavits or counter
affidavits submitted before the investigating prosecutor,
and if such are not available, testimonies shall be in the
form of judicial affidavits, subject to additional direct and
cross-examination questions.
In all other cases where the culpability or the
innocence of the accused is based on the testimonies of
the alleged eyewitnesses, the testimonies of these
witnesses shall be in oral form.
12. Stipulations
During pre-trial/preliminary conference, the court shall
require the parties to enter into stipulations on the subject
of both direct and cross-examinations of witnesses who
have no personal knowledge of the material facts
constituting the crimes, such as forensic chemists, medico1071

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

legal officers, investigators, auditors, accountants,
engineers, custodians, expert witnesses and other similar
witnesses, who will testify on the authenticity, due
execution and the contents of public documents and
reports; corroborative witnesses; and those who will testify
on the civil liability.
This rule is without prejudice to allowing additional
direct and cross-examination questions.
If stipulations cannot be had in full, where the adverse
party does not waive the right to cross-examination, the
subject of the direct testimony of these witnesses should
be stipulated upon, without prejudice to additional direct
and cross-examination questions.
13. Trial
(a) The court shall encourage the accused and the
prosecution to avail of:
i. For the accused - Secs. 12 and 13, Rule 119 on the
application for examination of witness for accused
before trial and how it is made; and
ii. For the prosecution - Sec. 15, Rule 119 on the
conditional examination of witness for the prosecution.
(b) Absence of counsel de parte - In the absence of
counsel de parte, the hearing shall proceed upon
appointment by the court of a counsel de officio.
(c) Offer of evidence - The offer of evidence, the
comment/objection thereto, and the court ruling shall be
made orally. A party is required to make his/her oral offer
of evidence on the same day after the presentation of
his/her last witness, and the opposing party is required to
immediately interpose his/her oral comment/objection
thereto. Thereafter, the court shall make a ruling on the
offer of evidence in open court.
1072

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

In making the offer, the counsel shall cite the specific
page numbers of the court record where the exhibits being
offered are found, if attached thereto. The court shall
ensure that all exhibits offered are submitted to it on the
same day of the offer.
If the exhibits are not attached to the record, the party
making the offer must submit the same during the offer of
evidence in open court.
(d)
Demurrer to Evidence - After the
prosecution has rested its case, the court shall inquire from
the accused if he/she desires to move for leave of court to
file a demurrer to evidence, or to proceed with the
presentation of his/her evidence.
If the accused orally moves for leave of court to file a
demurrer to evidence, the court shall orally resolve the
same. If the motion for leave is denied, the court shall
issue an order for the accused to present and terminate
his/her evidence on the dates previously scheduled and
agreed upon, and to orally offer and rest his/her case on
the day his/her last witness is presented.
If despite the denial of the motion for leave, the
accused insists on filing the demurrer to evidence, the
previously scheduled dates for the accused to present
evidence shall be cancelled.
The demurrer to evidence shall be filed within a non
extendible period of ten (10) calendar days from the date
leave of court is granted, and the corresponding comment
shall be filed within a non-extendible period of ten (10)
calendar days counted from date of receipt of the demurrer
to evidence. The demurrer shall be resolved by the court
within a non-extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days
from date of the filing of the comment or lapse of the ten
(10)-day period to file the same.

1073

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

If the motion for leave of court to file demurrer to
evidence is granted, and the subsequent demurrer to
evidence is denied, the accused shall likewise present and
terminate his/her evidence (one day apart, morning and
afternoon) and shall orally offer and rest his/her case on
the day his/her last witness is presented. The court shall
rule on the oral offer of evidence of accused and the
comment or objection of the prosecution on the same day
of the offer. If the court denies the motion to present
rebuttal evidence because it is no longer necessary, it shall
consider the case submitted for decision.
(e) Presentation
Evidence.

of

Rebuttal

and

Sur-rebuttal

- If the court grants the motion to present rebuttal
evidence, the prosecution shall immediately proceed with
its presentation after the accused had rested his/her case,
and orally rest its case in rebuttal after the presentation of
its last rebuttal witness. Thereafter, the accused shall
immediately present sur-rebuttal evidence, if there is any,
and orally rest the case in sur-rebuttal after the
presentation of its last sur-rebuttal witness. Thereafter, the
court shall submit the case for decision.
(f) One-day examination of witness rule - The court
shall strictly adhere to the rule that a witness has to be fully
examined in one (1) day.
14. Memoranda
The submission of memoranda is discretionary on the
part of the court, which in no case shall exceed twenty-five
(25) pages in length, single-spaced, on legal size paper,
using size 14 font. The period to submit memoranda shall
be non-extendible and shall not suspend the running of the
period of promulgation of the decision; thus, with or without
memoranda, the promulgation shall push through
as scheduled.
1074

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

15. Lack of Stenographic Notes
Judges who conducted the trial and heard the
testimonies of some or all of the witnesses shall not defer
the submission of the case for decision on the ground of
incomplete or missing transcript of stenographic notes. If
the case was heard completely by another judge, not the
judge tasked to write the decision, the latter shall direct the
stenographers concerned to submit the complete
transcripts within a period of thirty (30) calendar days from
date of his/her assumption to office.
16. Promulgation
(a) Schedule of promulgation - The court shall
announce in open court and include in the order submitting
the case for decision, the date of the promulgation of its
decision which shall not be more than ninety (90) calendar
days from the date the case is submitted for decision,186
except when the case is covered by Special Rules and
other laws which provide for a shorter period.187
(b) Resolution of motion for reconsideration of
judgment of conviction or motion for new trial - A motion
for reconsideration of judgment of conviction or motion for
new trial under Rule 121 filed within the reglementary
period of fifteen (15) days from promulgation shall be
resolved within a non-extendible period of ten (10)
calendar days from the submission of the comment of the
prosecution. With or without comment, the court shall
resolve the motion within the ten (10)-day period.

rseFor those covered by Regular Rules, including Sandiganbayan and
Court of Tax Appeals.
,8rFor those covered by Special Laws and Rules: (a) Drug cases - 15
days from the date of submission for resolution of the case; (b) Environmental
cases - 60 days from the last day of the 30-day period to file memoranda; (c)
Intellectual Property Rights cases - 60 days from the time the case is submitted
for decision, with or without the memoranda; and (d) Others that may be provided
in other Rules and Laws.

1075

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

17. Inventory of Criminal Cases
The one (1) week of each semester devoted for the
conduct of annual and semi-annual physical inventory of
cases and preparation of the semestral docket inventory
report pursuant to Administrative Circular No. 76-2007
shall not suspend court hearings.
18. Posting
The Revised Guidelines shall be posted at all floors of
the covered halls of justice, the Sandiganbayan, the Court
of Tax Appeals and the offices of their respective Clerks of
Court, including all offices of the Integrated Bar of the
Philippines and other Bar associations.
IV. Monitoring, Evaluation and Training
The application of and adherence to the Revised
Guidelines shall be subject to periodic monitoring by the
Committee and its Technical staff by visitation and
submission of data.
For this purpose, all courts covered by the Revised
Guidelines shall accomplish and submit a periodic report of
data in a form to be generated and distributed by the
Committee.
Training of judges and court personnel shall be
undertaken by the PHILJA in coordination with the
Committee and its Technical staff.
V. Effect of Non-Compliance
Non-compliance with the Revised Guidelines,
including failure to observe the timelines and deadlines
herein provided, is a ground for disciplinary action.

1076

J9JC9B0M

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

VI. Repealing Clause
Existing rules and guidelines inconsistent with the
Revised Guidelines are deemed amended or repealed.
VII. Effectivity
The Revised Guidelines shall take effect on 1
September 2017, after publication for two (2) consecutive
weeks in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

1077

J9JC9B0M

APPENDIX D
RULE ON CYBERCRIME WARRANTS188
Section 1. PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
Section 1.1. Title. - This Rule shall be known and
cited as the "Rule on Cybercrime Warrants."
Section 1.2. Scope and Applicability. - This Rule sets
forth the procedure for the application and grant of warrants
and related orders involving the preservation, disclosure,
interception, search, seizure, and/or examination, as well as
the custody, and destruction of computer data, as provided
under Republic Act No. (RA) 10175, otherwise known as the
"Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012."189
Section 1.3. Supplementary Nature of this Rule to
the Existing Rules of Procedure and Remedies. - This
Rule supplements the existing Rules of Criminal Procedure,
which provisions shall continue to govern the preliminary
investigation and all stages of prosecution of criminal actions
involving violations of RA 10175, including all crimes defined
and penalized by the Revised Penal Code, as amended, and
special laws, committed by, through, and with the use of
information and communications technologies.
Remedies provided under existing procedural rules
shall, whenever applicable, be made available to any party
who seeks relief against any of the orders provided under
this Rule.190

/Note omitted]
"Sections 10 to 21, except Sections 12 and 19.
,90Such remedies as, but not limited to, a motion to quash any of the
warrants provided under this Rule.

1078

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 1.4. Definition o f Terms. - For purposes of
this Rule:
a) Communication - refers to the transmission of
information through information and communications
technology (ICT) media, including voice, video, and other
forms of data;191
b) Computer - refers to an electronic, magnetic,
optical, electrochemical, or other data processing or
communications device, or grouping of such devices,
capable of performing logical arithmetic, routing, or storage
functions and which includes any storage facility or
equipment or communications facility or equipment directly
related to or operating m conjunction with such device;192
c) Computer data - refers to any representation of facts,
information, or concepts in a form suitable for processing in a
computer system, including a program suitable to cause a
computer system to perform a function, and includes electronic
documents and/or electronic data messages whether stored in
local computer systems or online;193
d) Computer system - refers to any device or group
of interconnected or related devices, one or more of which,
pursuant to a program, performs automated processing of
data;194*

191R.A. 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(c); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(g).
,92lt covers any type of computer device including devices with data
processing capabilities like mobile phones, smart phones, computer networks,
and other devices connected to the internet; RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(d);
IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(i).
,93RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(e); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(j).
(94lt covers any type of device with data processing capabilities including,
but not limited to, computers and mobile phones. The device consisting of
hardware and software may include input, output, and storage components which
may stand alone or be connected to a network or other similar devices. It also
includes computer storage devices or media; RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(g);
IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(l).

1079

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

e) Content data - refers to the content of the
communication, the meaning or purported meaning of the
communication, or the message or information being
conveyed by the communication, other than traffic data;195
f) Cybercrime court - refers to any of the Regional
Trial Courts which are designated as special cybercrime
courts;196
g) Forensic image - also known as a forensic copy,
refers to an exact bit-by-bit copy of a data carrier, including
slack, unallocated space, and unused space;197
h) Forensics - refers to the application of
investigative and analytical techniques that conform to
evidentiary standards for use in court;198
i) Hash value - refers to the mathematical algorithm
produced against digital information (a file, a physical disk
or a logical disk) thereby creating a "digital fingerprint" or
"digital DNA" for that information;199
j) Information and Communications Technology
(ICT) - refers to the totality of electronic means to access,
create, collect, store, process, receive, transmit, present
and disseminate information;200
k) Interception - refers to listening to, recording,
monitoring
or surveillance
of the
content
of
communications, including procuring of the content data,
either directly, through access and use of a computer
SSIRR, Rule 1, Section 3(m).
f96A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC, 15 November 2016; RA 10175, Chapter
5, Section 2 1 , 2nd par.
w /Note omitted]
<98[Note omitted]
199A hash value is a one-way algorithm that makes it impossible to
alter digital evidence without causing change in the corresponding
values; IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(x).
200RA 10844, Section 3(a).

1080

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

system, or indirectly through the use of electronic
eavesdropping or tapping devices, at the same time that
the communication is occurring;201
l) Item - is a general term used to refer to objects of
the warrant application and/or the warrant itself, such as
the subject computer data, the related computer device/s,
and/or other parts of the computer system;

m) Offense - is a general term used to refer to either
a violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses), Section 5
(Other Offenses), or Section 6 (all crimes defined and
penalized by the Revised Penal Code, as amended, and
other special laws, if committed by, through, and with the
use of ICT), Chapter II of RA 10175;
n) Off-site search - refers to the process whereby
law enforcement authorities, by virtue of a warrant to
search, seize, and examine, are allowed to bring the
computer device/s and/or parts of the computer system
outside the place to be searched in order to conduct the
forensic examination of the computer data subject of the
warrant;202
o) On-site search - refers to the process whereby
law enforcement authorities, by virtue of a warrant to
search, seize, and examine, obtains the computer data
subject thereof for forensic examination, without the need
of bringing the related computer device/sand/or parts of
the computer system outside the place to be searched;203
p) Preservation - refers to the keeping of data that
already exists in a stored form, protected from anything
that would cause its current quality or condition to change
or deteriorate;204
20,RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(m); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(aa).
202[Note omitted]
203[Note omitted]
204[Note omitted]

1081

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

q) Service provider - refers to: (a) any public or
private entity that provides users of its service the ability to
communicate by means of a computer system; and (b) any
other entity that processes or stores computer data on
behalf of such communication service or users of such
service;
The term service provider as used in this Rule is
understood to include any service provider offering its
services within the territory of the Philippines, regardless of
its principal place of business;2
206
5
0
r) Subscriber's information - refers to any
information contained in the form of computer data or any
other form that is held by a service provider, relating to
subscribers of its services, other than traffic or content
data, and by which any of the following can be established:
1. The type of communication service used, the
technical provisions taken therewith, and the period of
service;
2. The subscriber's identity, postal or geographic
address, telephone and other access number, any
assigned network address, billing and payment
information that are available on the basis of the service
agreement or arrangement; or
3. Any other available information on the site of the
installation of communication equipment that is available on
the basis of the service agreement or arrangement;207 and
s) Traffic data - refers to any computer data other
than the content of the communication, including, but not

205RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(n); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(ff).
206Convention on Cybercrime (ETS No. 185); Chapter 11, Section
2, Article 18(1 )(b).
207RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(o); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(gg).

1082

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

limited to, the communication's origin, destination, route,
time, date, size, duration, or type of underlying service.208
Section 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.1. Venue o f Criminal Actions. - The
criminal actions for violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime
offenses) and/or Section 5 (Other offenses), Chapter II of
RA 10175, shall be filed before the designated cybercrime
court of the province or city where the offense or any of its
elements is committed,209 or where any part of the computer
system used is situated, or where any of the damage
caused to a natural or juridical person took place: Provided,
that the court where the criminal action is first filed shall
acquire jurisdiction to the exclusion of the other courts.210
All other crimes defined and penalized by the Revised
Penal Code, as amended, and other special laws,
committed by, through, and with the use of ICT, as
provided under Section 6, Chapter II of RA 10175, shall be
filed before the regular or other specialized regional trial
courts,211 as the case may be.
Section 2.2. Where to file an Application fo r a
Warrant. - An application for a warrant under this Rule
concerning a violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses)
and/or Section 5 (Other Offenses), Chapter II of RA 10175
shall be filed by the law enforcement authorities before any
of the designated cybercrime courts of the province or the
city where the offense or any of its elements has been
committed, is being committed, or is about to be
committed, or where any part of the computer system used
is situated, or where any of the damage caused to a
208RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(p); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(hh).
209/Note omitted]
2,0RA 10175, IRR, Rule 4, Section 22.
2,,A.M. No. 99-11-07-SC [1 February 2000] designates certain branches
of the RTCs as Family Courts; Supreme Court Administrative Order No. 23-08
[23 January 2008] designates special courts to hear, try, and decide
environmental cases.

1083

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

natural or juridical person took place. However, the
cybercrime courts in Quezon City, the City of Manila,
Makati City, Pasig City, Cebu City, Iloilo City, Davao City
and Cagayan De Oro City shall have the special authority
to act on applications and issue warrants which shall be
enforceable nationwide212 and outside the Philippines.
On the other hand, an application for a warrant under
this Rule for violation of Section 6, Chapter II of RA 10175
(all crimes defined and penalized by the Revised Penal
Code, as amended, and other special laws, if committed
by, through, and with the use of ICT) shall be filed by the
law enforcement authorities with the regular or other
specialized regional trial courts, as the case may be, within
its territorial jurisdiction in the places above-described.213
Section 2.3. Incidents Related to the Warrant
When a Criminal Action is Instituted. - Once a criminal
action is instituted, a motion to quash and other incidents
that relate to the warrant shall be heard and resolved by
the court that subsequently acquired jurisdiction over the
criminal action.214The prosecution has the duty to move for
the transmittal of the records, as well as the transfer of the
items' custody to the latter court, which procedure is set
forth in Section 7.2 of this Rule.
Section 2.4. Examination of Applicant and Record.
- Before issuing a warrant, the judge must personally
examine in the form of searching questions and answers,
in writing and under oath, the applicant and the witnesses
he may produce, on facts personally known to them and
attach to the record their sworn statements, together with
the judicial affidavits submitted.
2,2Expanding the list of SCCCs with authority to issue warrants
enforceable nationwide under A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC [15 November 2016],
2,3The places above-described refer to the province or the city where the
offense or any of its elements has been committed, is being committed, or is about
to be committed, or where any part of the computer system used is situated, or
where any of the damage caused to a natural or juridical person took place.
2UMalaloan v. Court of Appeals, G.R 104879, 6 May 1994.

1084

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 2.5. Effective Period of Warrants. - Any
warrant issued under this Rule shall only be effective for
the length of time as determined by the court, which shall
not exceed a period often (10) days from its issuance. The
court issuing the warrant may, upon motion, extend its
effectivity based only on justifiable reasons for a period
not exceeding ten (10) days from the expiration of the
original period.
Section 2.6. Contempt. - Failure to timely file the
returns for any of the issued warrants under this Rule or to
duly turn-over to the court's custody any of the items
disclosed, intercepted, searched, seized, and/or examined
as prescribed hereunder, shall subject the responsible law
enforcement authorities to an action for contempt, which
procedures shall be governed by Rule 71 of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, insofar as they are applicable.
Section 2.7. Obstruction of Justice for NonCompliance; Where to File. - Pursuant to Section 20,
Chapter IV of RA 10175, failure to comply with the
provisions of Chapter IV, specifically the orders from law
enforcement authorities, shall be punished as a violation of
Presidential Decree No. 1829, entitled "Penalizing
Obstruction Of Apprehension And Prosecution Of Criminal
Offenders."215
The criminal charge for obstruction of justice shall be
filed before the designated cybercrime court that has
jurisdiction over the place where the non-compliance was
committed.
Section 2.8. Extraterritorial Service of Warrants
and Other Court Processes. - For persons or service
providers situated outside of the Philippines, service of
warrants and/or other court processes shall be coursed
through the Department of Justice - Office of Cybercrime,
2,5[Note omitted]

1085

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

in line with all relevant international instruments and/or
agreements on the matter.216
Section 3. PRESERVATION OF COMPUTER DATA217
Section 3.1. Preservation of Computer Data. Pursuant to Section 13, Chapter IV of R A 10175, the
integrity of traffic data and subscriber's information shall be
kept, retained, and preserved by a service provider for a
minimum period of six (6) months from the date of the
transaction. On the other hand, content data shall be
preserved for six (6) months from the date of receipt of the
order from law enforcement authorities requiring its
preservation.
Law enforcement authorities may order a one-time
extension for another six (6) months: that once computer
data that is preserved, transmitted or stored by a service
provider is used as evidence in a case, the receipt by the
service provider of a copy of the transmittal document to the
Office of the Prosecutor shall be deemed a notification to
preserve the computer data until the final termination of the
case and/or as ordered by the court, as the case maybe.
The service provider ordered to preserve computer
data shall keep the order and its compliance therewith
confidential.
Section 4. DISCLOSURE OF COMPUTER DATA218
Section 4.1. Disclosure of Computer Data. Pursuant to Section 14, Chapter IV of RA 10175, law
enforcement authorities, upon securing a Warrant to
Disclose Computer Data (WDCD) under this Rule, shall
issue an order requiring any person or service provider to
RA 10175, Chapter 6, Section 22, and Chapter 7, Section 23.
2,7RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 13.
2,8RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 14.

1086

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

disclose or submit subscriber's information, traffic data or
relevant data in his/her or its possession or control within
seventy-two (72) hours from receipt of the order in relation
to a valid complaint officially docketed and assigned for
investigation and the disclosure is necessary and relevant
for the purpose of investigation.
Section 4.2. Warrant to Disclose Computer Data
(WDCD).- A WDCD is an order in writing issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge,
upon application of law enforcement authorities,
authorizing the latter to issue an order to disclose and
accordingly, require any person or service provider to
disclose or submit subscriber's information, traffic data, or
relevant data in his/her or its possession or control.
Section 4.3. Contents o f Application for a WDCD The verified application for a WDCD, as well as the
supporting affidavits, shall state the following essential facts:
1)

The probable offense involved;

2) Relevance and necessity of the computer data or
subscriber's information sought to be disclosed for the
purpose of the investigation;
3) Names of the individuals or entities whose
computer data or subscriber's information are sought to
be disclosed, including the names of the individuals or
entities who have control, possession or access thereto,
if available;
4) Particular description of the computer data or
subscriber's information sought to be disclosed;219
5) Place where the disclosure of computer data or
subscriber's information is to be enforced, if available;

2,9[Note omitted]

1087

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

6) Manner or method by which the disclosure of the
computer data or subscriber's information is to be
carried out, if available;220 and
7) Other relevant information that will persuade the
court that there is a probable cause to issue a WDCD.
Section 4.4. Issuance and Form o f WDCD. - If the
judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to believe
that the facts upon which the application for WDCD exists,
he/she shall issue the WDCD, which must be substantially
in the form prescribed in "Annex A" of this Rule.
Section 4.5. Return on the WDCD; Retained Copy.
- Within forty-eight (48) hours from implementation or after
the expiration of the effectivity of the WDCD, whichever
comes first, the authorized law enforcement officer shall
submit a return on the WDCD to the court that issued it
and simultaneously turn over the custody of the disclosed
computer data or subscriber's information thereto as
provided under Section 7.1 of this Rule.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
return has been made, and if none, to summon the law
enforcement officer to whom the WDCD was issued and
require him to explain why no return was made, without
prejudice to any action for contempt as provided under
Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Law enforcement authorities are allowed to retain a
copy of the disclosed computer data or subscriber's
information subject of the WDCD which may be utilized for
case build-up or preliminary investigation purposes,
without the need of any court intervention; that the details
thereof are kept strictly confidential and that the retained
copy shall be labelled as such.

220[Note omitted]

1088

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

The retained copy shall be turned over upon the filing
of a criminal action involving the disclosed computer data
or subscriber's information to the court where such action
has been instituted, or if no criminal action has been filed,
upon order of the issuing court under the procedure set
forth in paragraph 3 of Section 8.2 of this Rule.
Upon its turn-over, the retained copy shall always be
kept, destroyed, and/or returned together with the
computer data or subscriber's information that was
originally turned over to the issuing court under the first
paragraph of this Section.
Section 4.6, Contempt - Non-compliance with the
order to disclose issued by law enforcement authorities
shall be deemed non-compliance with the WDCD on which
the said order is based, and shall likewise give rise to an
action for contempt under Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Section 5. INTERCEPTION OF COMPUTER DATA221
Section 5.1. Interception of Computer Data. Interception, as defined under Section 3 (m), Chapter I of
RA 10175, may be carried out only by virtue of a court
issued warrant, duly applied for by law enforcement
authorities.
Section 5.2. Warrant to Intercept Computer Data
(WICD). - A WICD is an order in writing issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge,
upon application of law enforcement authorities,
authorizing the latter to carry out any or all of the following
activities: (a) listening to, (b) recording, (c) monitoring, or
(d) surveillance of the content of communications,
including procuring of the content of computer data, either
directly, through access and use of a computer system or
indirectly, through the use of electronic eavesdropping or
22,RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 15.

1089

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

tapping devices, at the same time that the communication
is occurring.
Section 5.3. Contents of Application for WICD.
The verified application for a WICD, as well as the
supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts similar
to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the subject
matter is the communication or computer data sought to be
intercepted.
Section 5.4.Issuance and Form of WICD. - If the
judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to believe
that the facts upon which the application for WICD exists,
he shall issue the WICD, which must be substantially in the
form prescribed in "Annex B" of this Rule.
Section 5.5. Return on the WICD. - Within fortyeight (48) hours from implementation or after the expiration
of the effectivity of the WICD, whichever comes first, the
authorized law enforcement officers shall submit a return
on the WICD to the court that issued it and simultaneously
turn-over the custody of the intercepted communication or
computer data thereto as provided under Section 7.1 of
this Rule.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
return has been made, and if none, to summon the law
enforcement officer to whom the WICD was issued and
require him to explain why no return was made, without
prejudice to any action for contempt as provided under
Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Section 5.6. Notice after filing of Return. - Within
thirty (30) days from the filing of the return, or, if no return is
filed, from the lapse of the forty-eight (48) hour period to file
the return, the authorized law enforcement officer has the
duty to notify the person whose communications or computer
data have been intercepted of the activities conducted
pursuant to the WICD. If a return has been filed, a copy of the
1090

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

same shall be attached to the notice. On the other hand, if no
return has been filed, the notice shall state the details of the
interception activities, including the contents of the
intercepted communication or computer data.
Within ten (10) days from notice, the person whose
communications or computer data have been intercepted
may challenge, by motion, the legality of the interception
before the issuing court.
Section 6. SEARCH, SEIZURE AND
EXAMINATION OF COMPUTER DATA222
Section 6.1. Warrant to Search, Seize and
Examine Computer Data (WSSECD). - A Warrant to
Search, Seize and Examine Computer Data (WSSECD) is
an order in writing issued in the name of the People of the
Philippines, signed by a judge, upon application of law
enforcement authorities, authorizing the latter to search the
particular place for items to be seized and/or examined.
Section 6.2. Contents of Application for a
WSSECD. - The verified application for a WSSECD, as well
as the supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts
similar to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the
subject matter is the computer data sought to be searched,
seized, and examined, and all other items related thereto. In
addition, the application shall contain an explanation of the
search and seizure strategy to be implemented, including a
projection of whether or not an off-site or on-site search will
be conducted, taking into account the nature of the
computer data involved, the computer or computer system's
security features, and/or other relevant circumstances, if
such information is available.

222

-RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 15.

1091

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Section 6.3. Issuance and Form of WSSECD. - If
the judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to
believe that the facts upon which the application for
WSSECD exists, he shall issue the WSSECD, which must
be substantially in the form prescribed under "Annex C" of
this Rule.
Section 6.4. Off-site and Onsite Principle; Return
of Items Seized Offsite. - Law enforcement authorities
shall, if the circumstances so allow, endeavor to first make
a forensic image of the computer data on-site as well as
limit their search to the place specified in the warrant.
Otherwise, an off-site search may be conducted, provided
that a forensic image is, nevertheless, made, and that the
reasons for the said search are stated in the initial return.
A person whose computer devices or computer
system have been searched and seized off-site may, upon
motion, seek the return of the said items from the court
issuing the WSSECD: Provided, that a forensic image of
the computer data subject of the WSSECD has already
been made. The court may grant the motion upon its
determination that no lawful ground exists to otherwise
withhold the return of such items to him.
Section 6.5. Allowable Activities During the
implementation of the WSSECD. - Pursuant to Section
15, Chapter IV of RA 10175, the interception of
communications and computer data may be conducted
during the implementation of the WSSECD: Provided, that
the interception activities shall only be limited to
communications and computer data that are reasonably
related to the subject matter of the WSSECD; and that the
said activities are fully disclosed, and the foregoing relation
duly explained in the initial return.

1092

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Likewise, law enforcement authorities may order any
person, who has knowledge about the functioning of the
computer system and the measures to protect and
preserve the computer data therein, to provide, as is
reasonable, the necessary information to enable the
undertaking of the search, seizure and examination.223
Section 6.6. Initial Return. - Within ten (10) days
from the issuance of the WSSECD, the authorized law
enforcement officers shall submit an initial return that
contains the following information:
1) A list of all the items that were seized, with a
detailed identification of: (a) the devices of the computer
system seized, including the name, make, brand, serial
numbers, or any other mode of identification, if available;
and (b) the hash value of the computer data and/or the
seized computer device or computer system containing
such data;
2) A statement on whether a forensic image of the
computer data was made on-site, and if not, the reasons
for making the forensic image off-site;
3) A statement on whether the search was
conducted on-site, and if not, the reasons for conducting
the search and seizure off-site;
4) A statement on whether interception was
conducted during the implementation of the WSSECD,
together with (a) a detailed identification of all the interception
activities that were conducted; (b) the hash value/s of the
communications or computer data intercepted; and (c) an
explanation of the said items' reasonable relation to the
computer data subject of the WSSECD;
5) List of all the actions taken to enforce the
WSSECD, from the time the law enforcement officers
223

'RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 15.

1093

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

reached the place to be seized until they left the premises
with the seized items and reached the place where the
items seized were stored and secured for examination; and
6)
A reasonable estimation of how long the
examination of the items seized will be concluded and the
justification therefor.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
initial return has been made, and if none, to summon the
law enforcement authority to whom the WSSECD was
issued and require him to explain why no initial return was
made, without prejudice to any action for contempt as
provided under Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Section 6.7. Period to Examine and Order to Return.
- After the initial return is submitted to the court pursuant to
the WSSECD, the court shall issue an order fixing the period
to conclude the examination of all the items seized, which
period may be extended not exceeding thirty (30) days, upon
motion, for justifiable reasons.
Section 6.8. Final Return on the WSSECD. - Within
forty-eight (48) hours after the expiration of the period to
examine as provided under Section 6.7 of this Rule, the
authorized law enforcement officers shall submit a final return
on the WSSECD to the court that issued it, and simultaneously
turn-over the custody of the seized computer data, as well as
all other items seized and/or the communications or computer
data intercepted in relation thereto, following the procedure
under Section 7.1 of this Rule.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
final return has been made, and if none, to summon the
law enforcement officer to whom the WSSECD was issued
and require him to explain why no final return was made,
without prejudice to any action for contempt as provided
under Section 2.6 of this Rule.

1094

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 6.9. Examination where lawful possession
of device is obtained; Warrant to Examine Computer
Data (WECD). - Upon acquiring possession of a computer
device or computer system via a lawful warrantless arrest, or
by any other lawful method,224 law enforcement authorities
shall first apply for a warrant before searching the said
computer device or computer system for the purpose of
obtaining for forensic examination the computer data
contained therein. The warrant therefor shall be denominated
as a Warrant to Examine Computer Data (WECD).
The verified application for a WECD, as well as the
supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts similar
to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the subject
matter is the computer data sought to be examined. In
addition, the application shall disclose the circumstances
surrounding the lawful acquisition of the computer device
or computer system containing the said computer data.
If the judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to
believe that the facts upon which the application for WECD
exists, he shall issue the WECD, which must be substantially
in the form prescribed under "Annex D" of this Rule.
The initial and final returns, as well as the period to
examine under a WECD, shall be similarly governed by the
procedures set forth in Sections 6.6 to 6.8 of this Rule.
Interception of communications and computer data
may be likewise conducted during the implementation of
the WECD under the same conditions stated in Section 6.5
of this Rule.

22'fValid warrantless seizure, en flagrante delicto, or by voluntary surrender
of the unit.

1095

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Section 7. CUSTODY OF COMPUTER DATA
Section 7.1. Deposit and Custody o f Seized
Computer Data.225- Upon the filing of the return for a WDCD
or WICD, or the final return for a WSSECD or WECD, all
computer data subject thereof shall be simultaneously
deposited in a sealed package with the same court that
issued the warrant. It shall be accompanied by a complete
and verified inventory of all the other items seized in relation
thereto, and by the affidavit of the duly authorized law
enforcement officer containing:
1) The date and time of the disclosure, interception,
search, seizure, and/or examination of the computer data,
as the case may be. If the examiner or analyst has
recorded his/her examination, the recording shall also be
deposited with the court in a sealed package and stated in
the affidavit;
2) The particulars of the subject computer data,
including its hash value;
3) The manner by which the computer data was
obtained;
4) Detailed identification of all items seized in relation
to the subject computer data, including the computer
device containing such data and/or other parts of the
computer system seized, indicating the name, make,
brand, serial numbers, or any other mode of identification,
if available;
5) The names and positions of the law enforcement
authorities who had access to the computer data from the
time of its seizure until the termination of the examination but

225RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 16.

1096

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

prior to depositing it with the court,226 and the names of
officers who will be delivering the seized items to the court;227
6) The name of the law enforcement officer who may
be allowed access to the deposited data. When the said
officer dies, resigns of severs tie with the office, his/her
successor may, upon motion, be granted access to the
deposit; and
7) A certification that no duplicates or copies of the
whole or any part thereof have been made, or if made, all
such duplicates or copies are included in the sealed
package deposited, except for the copy retained by law
enforcement authorities pursuant to paragraph 3 of Section
4.5 of this Rule.
The return on the warrant shall be filed and kept by
the custodian of the logbook on search warrants who shall
enter therein the date of the return, the description of the
sealed package deposited, the name of the affiant, and
other actions of the judge.
Section 7.2. Duty o f the Prosecutor When Criminal
Action is Instituted. - Once a criminal action is instituted,
it shall be the duty of the prosecutor, or his/her duly
authorized representatives, to move for the immediate
transmittal of the records as well as the transfer of the
intercepted, disclosed, searched, seized and/or examined
computer data and items, including the complete and
verified inventory thereof, to the court that subsequently
acquired jurisdiction over the criminal action. The motion
for the purpose shall be filed before the court that issued
the warrant and has custody of the computer data within
ten (10) days from the time the criminal action is instituted
and shall be acted upon by the court within a period of
five (5) days.
226Temporary custody.
227Chain of custody.

1097

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

Section 7.3. Access to and Use of Computer
Data.228- The package containing the computer data so
deposited under Section 7.1 of this Rule shall not be
opened, or the recordings replayed, or its contents
revealed, or, in any manner, used as evidence,229 except
upon motion duly granted by the court. The motion for the
purpose shall state:
1) The relevance of the computer data sought to be
opened, replayed, revealed, or used as evidence; and
2) The names of the persons who will be allowed to
have access thereto, if the motion is granted.
The motion shall further include proof of service of
copies sent to the person or persons whose computer data
is the subject of the motion. The said person or persons
shall be given ten (10) days from receipt of notice thereof
to file a comment, after which the court shall rule on the
motion, unless it finds it necessary to conduct a
clarificatory hearing for the purpose.
Section 8. DESTRUCTION OF COMPUTER DATA230
Section 8.1. Duty of Service Providers and Law
Enforcement Authorities to Destroy. - Pursuant to
Section 17 of RA 10175, upon expiration of the periods as
provided in Sections 13 and 15 of the said law, service
providers and law enforcement authorities, as the case
may be, shall immediately and completely destroy the
computer data subject of preservation and examination.
Section 8.2. Destruction and Return of Computer
Data in the Custody of the Court. - Upon motion and
due hearing, the court may, for justifiable reasons, order
the complete or partial destruction, or the return to its
228RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 16.
229/Note omitted]
230/Note omitted]

1098

J9JC9B0M

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

lawful owner or possessor, of the computer data or any of
the related items turned over to its custody.
Likewise, the court may, and upon written notice to all
the parties concerned, order the complete or partial
destruction, or return to its lawful owner or possessor, of
the computer data or any of the related items turned over
to its custody if no preliminary investigation or case231
involving these items has been instituted after thirty-one
(31) days from their deposit, or if preliminary investigation
has been so instituted within this period, upon finality of the
prosecutor's resolution finding lack of probable cause. In
its sound discretion, the court may conduct a clarificatory
hearing to further determine if there is no reasonable
opposition to the items' destruction or return.
If the court finds the destruction or return of disclosed
computer data or subscriber's information subject of a
WDCD to be justified under this Section, it shall first issue
an order directing the law enforcement authorities to turn
over the retained copy thereof as described in paragraph 3
of Section 4.5 of this Rule. Upon its turn-over, the retained
copy shall be simultaneously destroyed or returned to its
lawful owner or possessor together with the computer data
or subscriber's information that was originally turned over
to the issuing court.
Section 8.3. Destruction o f Computer Data; How
Made. - The destruction of computer data and related
items, if so allowed under Section 8.2 of this Rule, shall be
made in the presence of the Branch Clerk-of-Court, or in
his/her absence, in the presence of any other person duly
designated by the court to witness the same. The accused
or the person/s from whom such items were seized, or
his/her representative or counsel, as well as the law
23,Refers to criminal actions where preliminary investigation is not required
as provided under Section 1, Rule 112 in relation to Section 1, Rule 110 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure.

1099

J9JC9B0M

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

enforcement officer allowed access to such items as
indicated in the inventory, or his/her duly authorized
representative, may also be allowed to witness the said
activity; Provided,that they appear during the scheduled
date of destruction upon written notice to them by the
Branch Clerk-of-Court at least three (3) days prior to the
aforementioned date.
Within twenty-four (24) hours from the destruction of
the computer data, the Branch Clerk-of-Court or the
witness duly designated by the court shall issue a sworn
certification as to the fact of destruction and file the said
cel iificate with the same court.
The storage device, or other items turned over to the
court's custody, shall be destroyed by shredding, drilling of
four holes through the device, prying the platters apart, or
other means in accordance with international standards
that will sufficiently make it inoperable.

1100

