PRIMER-REVIEWER
ON REMEDIAL LAW
(Vol. 2, Special Proceedings,
Criminal Procedure & Evidence)

With case updates
Seventh (2022) edition
MANUEL R. RIGUERA
Professorial Lecturer,
Far Eastern University Institute of Law,
University of Asia & the Pacific Institute of Law,
and Manuel L. Quezon University of Law

Review Director, Bar Reviewer, and Senior Coach,
Jurists Bar Review Center,
Partner, Ri
& Riguera Law Office
uera
g
Former Commissioner, Legal Education Board

Philippine Copyright 2022
by

MANUEL R. RIGUERA
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, uploaded,
downloaded, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without written permission of the author, For information
regarding permission, write to the author at the 2IF
Azucena Arcade, 255 Alabang-Zapote Road, Pamplona,
Las Pitas City, Metro Manila, Philippines 1740.
Every copy of this book must bear the original
signature of the author and a serial number on this page;
otherwise it shall be deemed to have come from an illegal
source and should not be sold, purchased, or distributed.
Thank you for supporting the author's rights and the
advancement of legal scholarship and research.

No.

34
ISBN 978-621-02-1709.4

Published and Printed by
CENTRAL BOOK SUPPLY, INC,
927 Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, Philippines
Email: info@central.com.ph

To Hazel, Jum, Aika, and Dmi.

PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH (2022) EDITION
l am heartened by the warm reception accorded to the

2020 edition of this book, which served as an introduction for
many bar reviewees to the 2020 amendments of the Rules

of Civil

Procedure and the Rules of Evidence.

As has

been my practice, I am coming up with a new edition two
years after the previous one. The need for a new edition
has become more pronounced in the light of quite a few
Supreme Court decisions which have overturned previously
sacrosanct case law.

The present edition continues the use of the Q&A
format which serves the dual purpose of not only
refreshing the reader's knowledge of legal theory but also
hones and sharpens his or her test-taking skills of fact-

pattern recognition, analogy, and deduction. I have always
maintained that legal rules and case holdings are best
absorbed for deployment in the bar and law examinations
by studying them not in isolation but in the context of their
underlying fact-patterns.
The importance of acquainting oneself with the latest

Jurisprudence and developments cannot be gainsaid and
hence salient Supreme Court cases and Issuances as well
as pertinent statutes and rules have been surveyed up to
the period ending 30 June 2021. must point out that RR.A.
No. 11576 (increasing the jurisdictional amounts for the
trial courts), the Rules on Expedited Procedures in the First
Level Courts (REPFLC), and other laws and issuances
which took effect after the bar cut-off date of 30 June 2021
are not included in the main text of this edition. I have
decided however to include as appendices R.A. No. 11576
and the REPFLC for the bar reviewee's reference.

In briefing Supreme Court cases, I have employed a
Q&A format or what I would call a "micro-digest." My
purpose was to present the most concise summary that I
could considering the limited time available to the reviewee
In so doing, I have on quite a few occasions taken some
liberties with the facts but without detracting from the
essence and integrity of the case law illustrated.
The writing, revision, and updating of Primer-Reviewer
would not have been possible without the continued
backing of my publisher Central Books. I thank President
Jose Paolo M. Sibal and Dr. Girlie Gonzales for their
generous patronage all throughout these years
Finally, I want to express my deep appreciation for
the unwavering encouragement and support of my wife
and my Muse, Atty. Hazel E. Rebadulla Riguera, and of my
children, Julliard Marie, Svetlana, and Dmitri. They have
been my beacon and inspiration all throughout these years
of writing and revising my book.
Manuel R. Riguera
Las Pinas City, May 2022

NOTES ON SYMBOLS & MNEMONICS
(S5 R2); Reference to Rules of Court Here the
symbol stands for Section 5, Rule 2 of the Rules of Court.
S" as a symbol for "Section" is also used for other rules
like the Rule on the Writ of Amparo.
(01 Bar Q1d ed): Reference to Bar Examination
Question in Remedial Law. Here the symbol indicates a
reference to the 2001 Bar Examination in Remedial Law,
Question No. 1, subquestion (d) and that the question was
edited ("ed")
(D FRENDS): Letters, usually In upper case, between
parentheses indicate a mnemonic or keyword. Here "D
FRENDS" stands for the keywords for the grounds for
attachment under S1 R57: DEPARTS, FRAUD, RECOVER
POSSESSION,
EMBEZZLEMENT,
NON-RESIDENT,
DISPOSE, SUMMONS BY PUBLICATION)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Rule 72.

SUBJECT MATTER & GENERAL RULES ......

3

SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES OF DECEASED PERSONS
Rule 73.

Rule 74.
Rule 75.
Rule 76.
Rule 77.
Rule 78.
Rule 79.

Rule 80
Rule 81,
Rule 82.

Rule 83.

VENUE & PROCESS ......do»so»oo..
SUMMARY SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES .......
PRODUCTION OF WILL, ALLOWANCE
OF WILL NECESSARY ......so»oooo,
ALLOWANCE OR
DISALLOWANCE OF WILL..ooooooooo.....
ALLOWANCE OF WILL PROVED
OUTSIDE OF PHILIPPINES............
LETTERS TESTAMENTARY 8
OF ADMINISTRATION.....».o.so.oo...
OPPOSING ISSUANCE OF LETTERS
TESTAMENTARY, PETITION &
CONTEST FOR LETTERS
OF ADMINISTRATION............................
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR..........coo..........
BONDS OF EXECUTORS
& ADMINISTRATORS ......so»so.so..
REVOCATION OF ADMINISTRATION,
DEATH, RESIGNATION &
REMOVAL OF EXECUTORS
& ADMINISTRATORS ......ooo..oooooooo
INVENTORY & APPRAISAL; PROVISION
FOR SUPPORT OF FAMILY......coo66.o....

vii

11
20
29

35
51
54

60
64
87

73
76

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Rule 84.
Rule 85,
Rule 86.
Rule 87.

Rule 88.
Rule 89.

ule 90.

GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF
EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS........ 78
ACCOUNTABILITY & COMPENSATION
OF EXECUTORS & ADMINISTRATORS........ 79
CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE •..••..
84
ACTIONS BY AND AGAINST
EXECUTORS &
ADMINISTRATORS...»ooooooo»so6608.. 102
PAYMENT OF THE DEBTS
OF THE ESTATE
•• 108
SALES, MORTGAGES, AND OTHER
ENCUMBRANCES OF
PROPERTY OF DECEDENT .............a..... 110
DISTRIBUTION AND PARTITION
OF PROPERTY OF DECEDENT ...o»»so6... 112
OTHER SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

Rule 91.
Rule 92.
Rule 93.
Rule 94.
Rule 95.

ESCHEATS
127
GUARDIANSHIP (VENUE)
132
APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIANS.......88888.. 134
BONDS OF GUARDIANS
140
SELLING & ENCUMBERING
PROPERTY OF THE WARD ........o....... 141
Rule 96. GENERAL POWERS &
DUTIES OF GUARDIANS
143
Rule 97. TERMINATION OF GUARDIANSHIP........... 145
Rule 98, TRUSTEES
146
ADOPTION,++86880088080-888800008800000808oooooo.149
Rule 102, HABEAS CORPUS .......800080000000000.0·, 161
RULE ON THE WRIT OF AMPARO.............., 188
RULE ON THE WRIT OF HABEAS DATA
209
Rule 103. CHANGE OF NAME...
225
Rule 108. CANCELLATION OR CORRECTION OF
ENTRIES IN THE CIVIL REGISTRY ....•••.• 237
.......oooooooooooooooooooooooooooaoo...
..».co».a.coo8686.

......osoosoooo8so8oo.....

.».808808800.0..80.800....

viii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
R.A. NO. 9048
261
Rule 107. ABSENTEES........so..........8006000000000000... 272
Rule 109. APPEALS IN SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS...... 274

CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

==--

PRELIMINARIES .......88680066600000006688606000....000000....,, 281
Rule 110. PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES
298
Rule 111. PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION.....».... 360
Rule 112. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION
405
Rule 113. ARREST
,
433
Rule 114, BA!L .88060888080080000008080000000086000.0......441
Rule 115. RIGHTS OF ACCUSED
,
461
Rule 116. ARRAIGNMENT & PLEA ..8.8..8.8.... 418
Rule 117. MOTION TO QUASH...coo.coo....... 482
Rule 118. PRE-TRIAL
538
Rule 119, TRIAL
543
Rule 120. JUDGMENT ...88668068a8888o88888o.,576
Rule 121. NEW TRIAL OR RECONSIDERATION
594
Rule 122. APPEAL
597
Rule 124. PROCEDURE IN THE
COURT OF APPEALS
609
Rule 126. SEARCH AND SEIZURE
611
Rule 127. PROVISIONAL REMEDIES
IN CRIMINAL CASES
656

'EVIDENCE '
Rule 130. RULES OF ADMISSIBILITY
661
ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS RULE S3-8 R130
671
PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
697
Rule 131. BURDEN OF PROOF,
BURDEN OF EVIDENCE.
And PRESUMPTIONS ................................•.• 931

ix

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Rule 129. WHAT NEED NOT BE PROVED
943
Rule 132. PRESENTATION OF EVIDENCE
956
AUTHENTICATION AND PROOF
OF DOCUMENTS
.,
.,.,
983
Rule 133. WEIGHT & SUFFICIENCY
OF EVIDENCE..so.coo.oooo.coo.o.a.o..... 1019
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CASES
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC) .....ooooooooooooooa........1022

APPENDICES
A.
B.
C.

D.

JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE......6a80..., 1061
EFFICIENT USE OF PAPER RULE
(A.M, No. 11-9-4-SC) ........0060..600.....................1069
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR
CONTINUOUS TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES
(A.M, No. 15-06-10-SC) ..60880000.......0..0.....1072
RULE ON CYBERCRIME WARRANTS
1096

x

-- SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

RULE 72. SUBJECT MATTER AND
APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL RULES
Q.

A.

What do you understand by remedial law?
Remedial law is that branch of law which provides for

the jurisdiction of courts and the rules concerning
pleading, practice, and procedure before the courts.

0.

What is a special proceeding?

A.

A special proceeding is a remedy by which a party
seeks to establish a status, a right, or a particular fact.

(S3 R1)
Q.

Distinguish a special proceeding from

a clvll

action.
A.

A special proceeding is distinguished from a civil
action as follows.:
AS TO NATURE. A special proceeding is non-

adversarial as it is not brought by one party against
another but is a remedy by which a party seeks to
establish a status, tight, or a particular fact, while a
civil action is adversarial as it is a suit by one party
against another for the protection or enforcement of a
right or the prevention or redress of a wrong.
AS TO BINDING EFFECT. A special proceeding
Is an in rem proceeding and hence binding upon the
whole world, while a civil action may or may not be an
in rem proceeding.
AS TO CAUSE OF ACTION. The concept of cause
of action finds no application in a special proceeding,
while a civil action, with the exception of some special
civil actions, must have a cause of action

3

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

a.

What are the special proceedings mentioned in
the Rules of Court?

A

As per the rules there are 14 special proceedings:
1)

Settlement of estate

2)

Escheat

3)

Guardianship and custody of minors

4)

Trustees

5)

Adoption

6)

Rescission and revocation of adoption

7)

Hospitalization of insane persons

8)

Habeas corpus

9)

Change of name

10) Voluntary dissolution of corporations
11)

Judicial approval of voluntary recognition of
minor natural children

12)

Constitution of family home

13)

Declaration of absence and death

14)

Cancellation or correction of entries in the civil
registry
Note: The procedure for rescission and revocation

of adoption has been assimilated in the Rule on
Adoption which became effective on 22 August 2002.
Petition for voluntary dissolution of corporation is now
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
and not the courts pursuant to Secs. 118 and 119 of

the Corporation Code. After the effectivity of the Family
Code, the concept of the natural child was abolished
4

RULE 72
Subject Matter and
Applicability of General Rules

and there is no more need to constitute a family home
for the same is deemed automatically constituted
under Art. 153 of the Family Code.
Q.

ls the enumeration of special proceedings in Sf
R72 exclusive?

A.

No. There are other special proceedings not mentioned

in

S1

R72.

Examples are

a

land

registration

proceeding (Ting v. Heisr of Lirio, G.R. No. 168913,
14 March 2007), a petition for judicial reconstitution of
certificate of title (Denila v. Republic, 15 July 2020), a
petition for the issuance of a writ of amparo or a writ
of habeas data, a liquidation proceeding (Consolidated
Bank & Trust Co. v. United Pacific Leasing & Finance
Corp., 19 October 2015), and proceedings under the
Special ADR Rules (Rule 1.2, Special ADR Rules).
Any remedy by which a party seeks to establish a

status, a nght, or a particular fact is a special proceeding
though It may not have been mentioned in S1 R72.
Q.

Petitioner Fujiki is a Japanese national who
married respondent Maria Paz Marinay in the
Philippines in 2004, The marriage did not sit well
with petitioner's parents. Thus, Fujiki could not
bring his wife to Japan where he resides. Eventually,

they lost contact with each other, In 2008, Marinay
met another Japanese, Maekara. Without the first
marriage being dissolved, Marinay and Maekara
were married in 2008 In Quezon City, Phlllppines.
Maekara brought Marinay to Japan. However,

Marinay allegedly suffered physical abuse from
Maekara. She left Maekara and started to contact
Fujiki. Fujiki and Marinay met In Japan and they

were able to reestablish their relationship. In 2010,
Fujiki helped Marinay obtain a judgment from a
family court in Japan which declared the marriage
between Marinay and Maekara void on the ground
5

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

of bigamy. In 2011, Fujiki flied a petition in the
RTC of Pasay City entitled: "Judicial Recognition
of Foreign Judgment (or Decree of Absolute
Nullity of Marriage)." Fujiki prayed that (1) the
Japanese Family Court judgment be recognized;
(2) that the bigamous marriage between Marinay
and Maekara be declared void ab initio; and (3) for
the RTC to direct the LCR of Quezon City to
annotate the Japanese Family Court judgment on
the Certificate of Marriage between Marinay and
Maekara and to endorse such annotation to the
Office of the Administrator and Civil Registrar
General in the NSO.
A few days after the filing of the petition, the
RTC immediately issued an Order dismissing the
petition based on Braza v. The City Civil Registrar
of Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental (607
SCRA 638 [2009)) wherein the SC ruled that "[Ijn a
special proceeding for correction of entry under
Rule 108, the trial court has no jurisdiction to
nullify marriages xx x." Was the Pasay City RTC's
dismissal of the petition correct?

A.

No. Since the recognition of a foreign judgment only
requires proof of fact of the judgment, it may be made
in a special proceeding for cancellation or correction
of entries in the civil registry under Rule 108 of the
Rules of Court, In Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas (628 SCRA
266 [2010]) this Court declared that "[t]he recognition
of the foreign divorce decree may be made in a R108
proceeding itself, as the object of special proceedings
(such as that in Rule 108 of the Rules of Court) is
precisely to establish the status or right of a party or a
particular fact." (Fujiki v. Marinay, 26 June 2013,
Carpio, J.).

6

RULE 72
Subject Matter and
Applicability of General Rules

•

Frank and Gina were married on 12 June 1987 in
Manila. Barely a year after the wedding, Frank

exhibited a violent temperament forcing Gina, for
reasons of personal safety, to live with her parents. A
year thereafter, Gina found employment as a domestic

helper in Singapore, where she worked for ten
consecutive years. Al! the time she was abroad,
Gina had absolutely no communications with Frank,

nor did she hear any news about him. While In
Singapore, Gina met and fell in love with Willie.
On 4 July 2007, Gina filed a petition with the

RTC of Manila to declare Frank presumptively
dead, so that she could marry Willie. The RTC
granted Gina's petition, The Office of the Solicitor
General (0SG) filed a Notice of Appeal with the
RTC, stating that it was appealing the declslon to
the Court of Appeals on questions of law and fact.
a)

ls a petition for Declaration of Presumptive
Death a special proceeding? Why or why
not?

b) As the RTC Judge who granted Gina's Petition,
will you give due course to the OSG's Notice
of Appeal? Why or why not? (09 Bar Q5)

A.
a)

No, a petition for declaration of presumptive death is
not a special proceeding.
The Supreme Court has held that such a petition
is not a special proceeding since it is not mentioned in
the enumeration of special proceedings in S1 R72.
(Republic • Jomoc, G.R. 163604, 6 May 2005).

7

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Note; It is submitted that a petition for declaration
of presumptive death is a special proceeding for it is a
remedy by which a party seeks to establish a status
or particular fact, i.e., the fact (albeit presumptive) of

death. It is similar to the petition for declaration of
absence under R107. The enumeration in S1 R72
should not be considered as exclusive. For instance,
the petition for a writ of amparo is not included in S1
R72 but it is evidently a special proceeding for it
seeks to establish a civil right.

b) As the RTC judge who granted Gina's petition, I
will not give due course to the OSG's Notice of
Appeal.
The Supreme Court has held that the judgment
of the court in a petition for declaration of presumptive
death is immediately final and executory pursuant to

Article 247 of the Family Code. Hence such a judgment
may not be appealed. (Republic v. Bermudez-Lorino,
G.RR. 160258, 19 January 2005).'
0.

In April 2012, petitioner Estrellita Matias filed with
the RTC of Tarlac City a petition for the declaration of
the presumptive death of her husband Wilfredo
Matias, a member of the Philippine Constabulary,
who has been missing and never heard from
since 1979, after never coming back from his tour
of duty. The purpose of the declaratlon of
presumptive death is to claim death benefits from
the government. The petition was docketed as
Special Proceeding No. 4850. The RTC rendered
judgment declaring Wilfredo absent or presumptively
In Republic y. Jomo, 6 May 2005, from whose facts the bar probiem was

based, it was ruled that the trial cut should give due course to the notice of
appeal, since a petition or declaration of presumptive death ts not s special
proceeding and hence a record on appeal is not required for appealing from a
judgment therein. Jomnoc overlooked that decisions in summary judicial
proceedings under the Family Code are immediately final and executory. (Art.

247, Family Code)

8

RULE 72
Subject Matter and
Applicability of General Rules

dead under Article 41 of the Family Code for
purposes of claiming financial benefits due him as
a former military officer. The Republic questioned

the RTC decision via a petition for certiorari. May
the RTC decision be set aside?
A.

Yes. Firstly the citation in the decision of Article 41 of
the Family Code is erroneous since the petitioner's
purpose in seeking such declaration was not for
purposes of remarriage but for purposes of claiming
death benefits from the government.
The petition should have been dismissed outright
since in our jurisdiction a petition whose sole objective
is to have a person declared presumptively dead under
Articles 390 and 391 of the Civil Code is not a valid
suit and no court has any authority to take cognizance
of the same. The reason is that since Articles 390 and
391 merely express evidentiary presumptions, an action
brought exclusively to declare a person presumptively
dead pursuant thereto presents no actual controversy
that a court may decide.
The SC stressed that the presumptions under
Articles 390 and 391 arise by operation of law, without
need of court declaration, once the factual conditions
in said articles are established. (Tadeo-Matias v.
Republic, 25 April 2018, Velasco, J.)

0.

Sal Mineo died intestate, leaving a Pt billion
estate. He was survived by his wife Dayanara and
their five children.
Dayanara filed a petition for the issuance of
letters of administration. Charlene, one of the children,
filed an opposition to the petition, alleging that
there was neither an allegation nor genuine effort
to settle the estate amicably before the filing of
the petition, Rule on the opposition. (10 Bar Q16)
9

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

The opposition should be denied
The Supreme Court has held that Article 151 of
the Family Code, which requires that in suits involving
the members of the same family there must be a
verified allegation of earnest efforts at compromise,
applies only to suits or ordinary civil actions but not to
a special proceeding, like a petition for settlement of

estate, which is simply for the establishment of a
status, a right, or a particular fact. (Manalo v. Court of
Appeals, 16 January 2001)

Q.

What provisions govern special proceedings?

A.

Special proceedings are primarily governed by the
special provisions applicable to them. In the absence

ol specia provisions, 'he rules provided for in or nary
actions shall be, as far as practicable, applicable in
special proceedings. (S2 R72).

10

SETTLEMENT OF ESTATE
OF DECEASED PERSONS
RULE 73. VENUE AND PROCESS
0.

Which court has jurisdiction over a proceeding for
the settlement of the estate of a deceased person?

A.

The Regional Trial Court has jurisdiction over proceedings
for the settlement of the estate of a deceased person

(probate proceedings) where the gross value of the
estate exceeds P300,000 and In Metro Manila where

the gross vatue of the estate exceeds P400,000.
(S19(4] BP BIg. 129). Where the gross value does not
exceed P300,000 or P400,000 it would be the Municipal
Trial Court which would have jurisdiction
Q.

A petition for allowance of a holographic will was
filed with the RTC. The petition did not allege the
gross value of the estate. The RTC's decision was
appealed to the Court of Appeals and the latter's
decision was appealed to the Supreme Court.
Neither the parties nor the lower courts delved on
the issue of jurisdiction. May the Supreme Court
motu proprio dismiss the case on the ground of
lack of jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. The jurisdiction of a court is determined from the
allegations in the complaint or petition. Since the
petition did not aver the gross value of the estate, the
RTC did not acquire jurisdiction over the case. A court
may motu proprio dismiss a case on the ground of
lack of jurisdiction, whether at the first instance or on

appeal (Frianola v. Banayad, G.R. 169700, 30 July 2009)

11

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Hand W are husband and wife. H died. The value
of their community property Is P500,000 while the

value of H's estate is P250,000. Which court would
have jurisdiction over the petition for the settlement
of H's estate?

A.

It is submitted that the RTC has jurisdiction, It is the
total value of the absolute community property and
not only the value of the share of the decedent, which

should furnish the jurisdictional test. Under S2 R73,
"[w]hen the marriage is dissolved by the death of the
husband or wife, the community property shall be
inventoried, administered, and liquidated, and the
debts thereof paid, in the testate or intestate proceedings
of the deceased spouse." In other words, the settlement
proceedings will necessarily entail the dissolution and
settlement of the absolute community and the property
thereof, (See 1 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 46 [7" rev. ed.], citing Ferandez
v. Maravilla, 119 Phil. 860).

0.

What is the initiatory pleading In probate proceedings?

A.

1) If a person dies testate, the initiatory pleading is a:
1.1 Petition for allowance of will and for letters
testamentary if there is an executor appointed in
the will, or
1.2 Petition for allowance of will and for letters
of administration with the will annexed, In case
there is a will but there is no executor named in the
will or the executor named in the will ls incompetent
or refuses to serve as such.

2) If a person dies intestate, the initiatory pleading
is a petition for letters of administration.
12

RULE 73
Venue and Process

Q.

Who is an executor?

A.

An executor is the person named in the will to
administer the decedent's estate and carry out the
provisions thereof.

Q.

Who is an administrator?

A

An administrator is the person appointed by the court
to administer the estate where the decedent died
intestate, or where the will was void and not allowed
to probate, or where no executor was named in the
will or the executor named therein is incompetent,
refuses the trust, or fails to give a bond. (BIRNI)

Q.

What is the venue of probate proceedings?

A.

If the decedent is a resident, venue lies with the RTC
r MTC where the decedent resided at the time of his
death. If the decedent is a non-resident, venue is
RTC/MTC of any place where he had estate.
(S1 R73)

Q.

Pedrillo, a Fil-Am permanent resident of Los Angeles,
California at the time of his death, bequeathed to
Winston a sum of money to purchase an annuity,
Upon Pedrillo's demise, his will was duly
probated in Los Angeles and the specified sum in
the will was In fact used to purchase an annuity
with XYZ of Hong Kong so that Winston would
receive the equivalent of US$1,000 per month for
the next 15 years.

Wanting to receive the principal amount of
the annuity, Winston files for the probate of
Pedrillo's will in the Makatl RTC. As prayed for,
the court names Winston as administrator of

the estate.

13

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Winston now files in the Makati RTC a motion
to compel XYZ to account for all sums in its
possession forming part of Podrillo's estate. Rule
on the motion. (10 Bar 015)
A.

The motion should be denied. The Supreme Court
has held that the writs and processes of a probate
court cannot extend outside the Philippines. Here
XYZ was in Hong Kong and thus beyond the
jurisdiction of the Philippine probate court.

Moreover the probato court should have dismissed
the petition at the onset. In a petition for probate of a

will where the testator is a non-resident, the petition
should allege the jurisdictional fact that the testator
left estate within the Philippines. (Cuenco v. Court of
Appeals, L-24742, 26 October 1973)
Q.

What is the rule of preferential jurisdiction?

A.

It Is the rule where the court first taking cognizance of
the settlement of the estate of a decedent shall
exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other courts.
(S1 R73). While S1 R73 speaks of "juridiction" what it
actually refers to is venue.

Q.

David, a resident of Catarman, Northern Samar,
died. Intestate proceedings were filed by an heir
in the RTC of Quezon City where the great bulk of
David's property ls situated. Subsequently a
testate proceeding was filed in the RTC of
Catarman. The records clearly show that David is
a resident of Catarman, The heir moved to
dismiss the probate proceeding filed in Catarman
citing the rule of preferential jurisdiction which
states that the court first taking cognizance of a
probate proceeding shall exercise jurisdiction to
the exclusion of all other courts. ls the heir's
contention correct?
14

RULE 73
Venue and Process

A.

No. The rule of preferential jurisdiction applies only to
a non-resident decedent, in which case the venue is
the RTC/MTC of any place where the decedent had
estate, Where the decedent is a resident, the venue
of a probate proceeding lies with the RTC/MTC where
he resided at the time of his death, Moreover testate

proceedings take preference over an intestate proceeding.
(Cuenco v. CA, 26 Oct 73)
Q.

Petitioner Vicente Uriarte filed with the RTC of
Negros Oriental a petition for the settlement of tho
estate of the late Don Juan Uriarte y Goite
(Speclal Proceeding No. 6344) alleging therein,
inter alia, that, as a natural son of the latter. Don
Uriarte is a non-resident with properties in legros
Oriental and Manila.
Subsequently, Higinio Uriarte, one of the two
private respondents herein, filed an opposition to
the petition in S.P, No. 6344 alleging that he was a
nephew of the deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite who
had "executed a Last WIii and Testament In Spain,
a duly authenticated copy whereof has been
requested and which shall be submitted to this
Honorable Court upon receipt thereof," and further
questioning petitioner's capacity and interest to
commence the intestate proceeding.

Then, Juan Uriarte Zamacona, the other
private respondent, commenced Special Proceeding
No. 5136 in the RTC of Manila for the probate of
the will of the deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite, and
on the same date he filed in Special Proceeding
No. 6344 of the Negros Court a motion to dismiss
the same on the following grounds: (1) that, as the
deceased Juan Uriarte y Golte had left a last will,
there was no legal basis to proceed with said
intestate proceedings, and (2) that petitioner
Vicente Uriarte had no legal personality and

15

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

interest to initiate said Intestate proceedings, he
not being an acknowledged natural son of the
decedent. A copy of the Petition for Probate and
of the alleged WIii were attached to the Motion to
Dismiss. Petitioner opposed the aforesaid motion
to dismiss contending that, as the Negros Court
was first to take cognizance of the settlement of
the estate of the deceased Juan Uriarte y Goite, it
had acquired exclusive jurisdiction over the same
pursuantto S1 R73.
The Negros Court sustained Juan Uriarte
Zamacona's motion to dismiss and dismissed the
Special Proceeding No. 6344 pending before it.

Did the Negros Court erred in dismissing
Special Proceeding No. 6644, on the one hand,
and on the other, did the Manila Court similarly
erred in not dismissing Special Proceeding No,
51396 notwithstanding proof of the prior filing of
Special Proceeding No. 6344 in the Negros Court?

A.

Yes both the Negros Court and the Manila Court
erred in their respective rulings.

Under the rule of preferential jurisdiction in case
of a non-resident decedent, the court first taking
cognizance of the settlement of the estate of the
decedent shall exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion of
all other courts. (S1 R73).
Here the petition for settlement of estate was first

filed in Negros Oriental and hence it shall exercise
jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other courts. The
ground for dismissal here is not lack of jurisdiction but
lack of venue.

16

RULE 73
Venue and Process

While it is true that probate proceedings shall
take precedence over intestate proceedings, this rule
should be taken in conjunction with the rule on
preferential jurisdiction. It is not in accord with public
policy and the orderly and inexpensive administration
of justice to unnecessarily multiply litigation, especially if

several courts would be involved. This, in effect, was
the result of the submission of the will aforesaid to the
Manila Court.

Thus Juan Uriarte Zamacona should have submitted
the will for probate to the Negros Court, either in a
separate special proceeding or in an appropriate
petition for said purpose filed in the already pending
Special Proceeding No, 6344, (Uriarte vs. Court of
First Instance of Negros Occ., 33 SCRA 252 [1970))°
Q.

Dencio was a long-time resident of Lipa City,
Batangas. He became ill however and had to go to
Manila for medical treatment. While in Manila, Dencio
stayed at the house of his son, Andres. Three
months later, Dencio died in the hospital in Manila
where he was being treated. His gross estate
amounted to P5 million. What is the proper venue
for the petition for the probate of Oencio's will?

A.

In the RTC of Manila. "Resides" in S1 R73 means
actual residence or place of abode and not domicile
or legal residence. (Fule v. CA, 74 SCRA 189). Here
Dencio at the time of his demise was actually residing

in Manila

The Court owever held that Petitioner waived the objection of improper
venue when he fled the motion to dismiss only after seven months from the time
he had notioe of the Manila Case (At p. 261)

17

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q,

The petition for letters of administration over the
estate of Felicisimo San Luis, the former govornor
of Laguna, was filed in the RTC of Makati (which
had jurisdiction then over Muntinlupa) by his
widow Felicidad. She prayed that the conjugal
partnership be dissolved, that letters of administration
issue to her, and that the estate of Felicisimo be
settled. The petition alleged that Felicisimo
resided in New Alabang Village, Muntinlupa, One
of the children of Felicisimo by his first marriage
moved to dismiss on the ground that the venue
should be in Laguna. The probate court dismissed
the petition on the ground of improper venue. It
held that at the time of his death Felicisimo was
the duly elected governor and a resident of the
province of Laguna, and that the petition should
be filed in Sta. Cruz, Laguna where he had his
official residence, Was the dismissal correct?

A.

No. The term "resides" in S1 R73 connotes "actual
residence" as distinguished from "legal residence" or
"domicile." There is a distinction between "residence"
for purposes of election laws and "residence" for
purposes of fixing the venue of actions. "Residence"
for purposes of election laws is synonymous with
"domicile." Residence however in S1 R73 simply means
actual residence or physical habitation, without regard
to animus revertendi. At the time of his death,
Felicisimo was actually residing at New Alabang
Village, not in Sta. Cruz, Laguna. (San Luis v. San
Luis, G.R. No. 133743, 6 February 2007).

Q.

How is venue challenged or contested
probate proceeding?

A,

The venue of probate proceeding can only be
questioned on appeal, but certiorari under R65 may
be resorted to if the impropriety of the venue (due to
18

In a

RULE 73
Venue and Process

residence or location of estate) appears on the
record. (S1 R73; Manzanero • CFI, 61 Phil. 850).
Q.

If settlement proceedings are filed in two or more
courts and the question of venue is raised, which
court would have the jurisdiction to decide the
issue of venue?

A.

The court in which the case was first filed has
exclusive jurisdiction to decide the issue of venue
(De Borja v. Tan, 27 July 1955).

Q.

If a spouse has died, in what proceeding is the
community property or conjugal partnership
liquidated? What If both spouses have died?

A

When the marriage is dissolved by the death of the
husband or wife, the community property shall be inventoried,
administered, and liquidated, and the debts thereof
paid, in the testate or intestate proceedings of the
deceased spouse, If both spouses have died, the
conjugal partnership shall be liquidated in the testate
or intestate proceedings of either. (S2 R73).

19

RULE 74. SUMMARY SETTLEMENT
OF ESTATES
Summary settlement of estates of small value

0.

What do you mean by summary settlement of
estates of small value?

A.

It is the procedure provided for in R74 for the
summary settlement of estate (whether testate or
intestate) whose gross value does not exceed
P10,000. The MTC has jurisdiction over a petition for
summary settlement.

Q.

Describe briefly the procedure in
settlement of estates of small value,

summary

A.
1) Filing of a petition with the MTC showing that the
gross value of the estate does not exceed

P10,000.
2) Publication of a notice of heanng once a week for
3 consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the province. (1x 3)
3) Hearing on the petition shall be held not less than 1

month nor more than 3 months from the date of the
last publication of the notice and after such notice to
interested persons as the court may direct
4) The court may proceed summarily without the
appointment pf an executor or administrator to
grant if proper the allowance of the will, the
determination of the heirs and the persons legally
entitled to participate in the estate, and, after the
payment of debts, to divide and distribute the
estate. (S2 R74)

20

RULE 74
Summary Settlement
Of Estates

Extrajudicial settlement of estates
•

May the heirs by agreement extrajudicially settle
the estate?

A.

Yes, subject to the requirements under R74.

Q.

What are the requirements in order that the heirs
may extrajudicially settle the estate?

A.
1) The decedent left no will and no debts.

2) The heirs are all of age or the minors are represented
by their judicial or legal representatives duly
authorized for the purpose.

a.

Describe briefly the procedure In extrajudicial
settlement.

A.
1) The parties may divide the estate among themselves
by means of a public instrument filed with the
register of deeds, and should they disagree they
may do so in an ordinary action of partition.

2)

If there is only one heir, he may adjudicate to
himself the entire estate by means of an affidavit
filed with the register of deeds. (Affidavit of selfadjudication).

3)

The parties to the extrajudicial settlement (whether
by public instrument or by stipulation in a pending
action for partition, or the sole heir who
adjudicates the entire estate to himself by means
of an affidavit) shall file a bond with the register of
deeds in an amount equivalent to the value of the
personal property involved.

21

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

4)

The

fact

of the

extrajudicial settlement or

administration shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the province once a week
for 3 consecutive weeks (1x 3)
Q.

Where the estate consists only of personal property,

is there still a need to file the extrajudicial
settlement with the register of deeds?
A.

Yes. The instrument is presented not for registration
but for file purposes only. (NARCISO PENA,
REGISTRATION OF LANO TITLES AND DEEDS 564
[1982 rev. ed.], citing LRC Consulta No. 114, 22 Sep
1956). If the estate includes real property, then the

instrument should be registered pursuant to Section
86 of the Property Registration Decree.

a.

Upon publicatlon, is the extrajudicial settlement

binding upon all persons?
A.

No. The extrajudicial settlement shall not be binding
upon any person who has not participated therein or
had no notice thereof. (S1 R74)

0.

Describe in brief the requirement of a bond in
extrajudicial settlement.

A.

The bond is required only if there is personal property
in the decedent's estate. It is not required if the
decedent left only real property since in such case it is
the lien under S4 R74 which would serve as protection
to the heirs or persons entitled to the estate.
The bond is filed simultaneously and as a
condition precedent to the filing of the public
instrument, or stipulation in the action for partition, or
of the affidavit in the register of deeds. The bond is
conditioned upon the payment of any just claim under
$4 R74

22

RULE 74
Summary Settlement
Of Estates
Q.

What is the presumption if no creditor files a
petition for letters of administration within 2 years
after the death of the decedent?

A.

It shall be presumed that the decedent left no debts
(S1 R74). This presumption is rebuttable.

Q.

May the distributees and the estate be held liable
after the settlement and tho distribution of the

estate?
A

Yes. If within 2 years after an extrajudicial settlement
or summary settlement and distribution of an estate, it
shall appear that an heir or other person has been
unduly deprived of his lawful participation in the_ estate.
such heir or person may com:e! the settlement of the
estate in
thecourts for the purpose of satisfying such
lawful participation. (S4 R74), This involves the
cancellation of the partition and the making of a new
division, unless the deprived heir or other person agrees
to be paid the value of his participation with interest.
(3 MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES
OF COURT 400 (1980 d.])
If within the same 2-year period, it shall appear
that there are debts outstanding against the estate or
that an heir or other person has been unduly deprived
pf his lawful participation payable in money, the court
having jurisdiction of the estate may after hearing
settle the amount of such debts or lawful participation
and order how much and in what manner each
distributee shall contribute in the payment thereof,
and may issue execution against the bond or the real
estate belonging to the deceased or both. (S4 R74).
Here the procedure is not to cancel the partition but
for the court to fix the amount of the lawful
participation in money. (/d, 400-401)

23

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Within what period may the bond and the real
estate remain charged with a liability to creditors,
heirs, or other persons?

A.

The bond and real estate shall remain charged with a
liability to creditors, heirs, or other persons for a period
of 2 years after such distribution, notwithstanding
any transfers of real estate that may have been made.
(S4 R74).

If on the date of the expiration of the 2-year
period the person authorized to file a claim is a minor
or mentally incapacitated, or is in prison or outside of
the Philippines (MIPO), he may present his claim within
1 year after such disability is removed,(S5 R74)

•

What is the duty of the register of deeds when a
deed of extrajudicial settlement has been duly
registered?

A.

The register of deeds shall annotate on the proper
title the 2-year lien mentioned in S4 R74. Upon the
expiration of the 2-year period and presentation of a
verified petition by the registered heirs, devisees or
legatees or any other party in interest that no claim of
any creditor, heir, or other person exists, the register
of deeds shall cancel the 2-year lien noted on the title
without the necessity pf a court order. (Sec. 86,
Property Registration Decree).

Q.

When is the two-year period deemed to commence?

A.

In the case of registered land, the period is deemed to
commence not from the date of the execution of the
instrument but from the date of registration thereof,
since it is the registration that gives constructive
notice to third persons of the existing settlement of
estate. (Section 52, Property Registration Decree;

24

RULE 74
Summary Settlement
Of Estates

NARCISO PENA, REGISTRATION OF LAND TITLES
AND DEEDS 564 [1982 rev. ed.], citing LRC Consulta

No. 93, 7 June 1956). In case of unregistered land
and other property, the two-year period is reckoned
from the settlement and distribution of the estate in
accordance with S4 R74.
Q.

B bought a property whose title still had the 2year lien annotated upon It, although more than
two years had already expired from the registration
of the extrajudicial settlement. Is the property
bought by B still bound by the 2-year lien?

A.

No more, The S4 R74 lien expires after 2 years and

becomes functus oficio, A buyer who purchases
thereafter is in good faith. (Carreon v. Agcaoili, L11156, 23 February 1961)
Q.

B, C, and D are the sole heirs of the deceased X.
The estate of X consists of Lot 1. C and D went to
the United States in 2000. In 2001, B executed
and registered an affidavit of self-adjudication
wherein he adjudicated Lot 1 to himself and a title
over Lot 1 in the name of B was Issued by the
register of deeds. In 2009, C and D came back.
Can they stlll file a petition to settle the estate of X
in order to obtain their lawful shares?

A.

Yes, provided they do so within one year from arrival
in the Philippines. If on the date of the expiration of
the 2-year lien, the person authorized to file a claim ls
a minor, mentally incapacitated, is in prison, or outside
of the Philippines, he may present his claim within
one year after such disability is removed. (S5 R74)

25

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

B, C, and O are the sole heirs of the deceased X.
The estate of X consists of Lot 1 situated in their
home province of Surigao del Norte. C and D went

to Manila in 2000. In 2001, B executed and
registered an affidavit of self-adjudication wherein
he adjudicated Lot 1 to himself and a title over Lot
1 was issued by the register of deeds in the name
of B. In 2009, C and D came back. Can they still
file a petition to settle the estate of X in order to
obtain their lawful shares?
A.

No more. The two-year period under S4 R74 had
already expired.

Q.

What if any would be the remedy of C and D?
What is the prescriptive period for bringing such
a remedy?

A.

C and D can still file an action for reconveyance
based on implied trust under Artice 1456 of the Civil
Code which provides that if property is acquired
through fraud, the person obtaining it Is by force of
law considered a trustee of an implied trust for the
benefit of the person from whom the property comes.
The action should be brought within 10 years from the
registration of the title in the name of B (Article 1144,
Civil Code) and provided that the property has not
been acquired by an innocent purchaser for value.
Pinoy died without a will. His wife, Rosie and
three children executed a deed of extrajudicial
settlement of his estate. The deed was properly
published and registered with the Register of
Deeds.' Three years thereafter, Suzie appeared,
claiming to be the illegitimate child of Pinoy. She
sought to annul the settlement claiming she was
deprived of her rightful share in the estate.

There is an imperfection in the question, What is published is not the
instrument but the tact of the extrajudical settlement. (S1 R74)

26

RULE 74

Summary Settlement
Of Estates

Rosie and the three children contended
that (1) the publication of the deed constituted
constructive notice to the whole world and should

therefore bind Suzy; and (2) Suzy's action had
already prescribed. Are Rosie and the three children
correct? Explain. (09 Bar QI-18)

A.

Rosie and her three children are not correct.

Tne publication of the deed of extrajudicial partition
does not constitute constructive notice to the whole
world since S1 R74 provides that "no extrajudicial
settlement shall be binding upon any person who has

not participated therein or had no notice thereof."
Suzy's action has not prescribed. Her action to
annul the settlement is in effect an action for
reconveyance which may be filed within 10 years from
the issuance of the title. Here only 3 years had lapsed;
hence Suzy's action has not yet prescribed.
Q

If a decedent died without will and without debts,
are his heirs under legal obligation to submit his
estate to a special proceeding for settlement of
intestate estate?

A.

No. In fact, the heirs are encouraged to have the
same partitioned, judicially or extrajudicially. (Butiong
v. Plazo, 5 August 2015, Peralta, J.)

Q.

Kuya and Diko filed a complaint for partition of
their deceased father's estate against their sisters,
Ate and Ditse, The brothers alleged that the four
of them are the only heirs of their deceased
father; that they could not agree as to how their
father's estate should be divided; that their father
left no will and that he left no debts whatsoever.

27

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

Ate and Ditse filed a motion to dismiss
insisting that the proper action should be a petition
for the issuance of letters of administration and
not an action for partition. Is the motion meritorious?
Explain. (86 Bar Q14ed).

A.

No, the motion to dismiss is not meritorious. Under
the Law on Partition, the estate of a deceased person
may properly be partitioned since a co-ownership has
arisen among the deceased's heirs, provided that the
deceased died Intestate and left no debts. A petition

for issuance of letters of administration is only an
option to settle the estate and ls not mandatory. In
fact the heirs in such a case are encouraged to have
the estate partitioned, whether judicially or extrajudicially,

as this is less expensive than a probate proceeding
(Butiong v. Pazo, 5 August 2015, Peralta, J.)

28

RULE 75. PRODUCTION OF WILL;
ALLOWANCE OF WILL NECESSARY
0.

Outline in brief the judicial proceedings for the
settlement of the estate of a deceased person.
(INA LC PDC)

A.
1)

FILING OF THE INITIATORY PLEADING; Le.,
petition for allowance of will or petition for letters
testamentary.

2)

NOTICE OF HEARING. The court shall issue a
notice of hearing. Publication 1 X 3 and personal
notice to known heirs, legatees, devisees, and
executor.

3)

ALLOWANCE/DISALLOWANCE OF WILL (PROBATE
PROPER). Proof of will. Necessary quantum of

evidence If uncontested or contested and in
cases of lost or destroyed will
4)

ISSUANCE OF LETTERS TESTAMENTARY/OF
ADMINISTRATION. When the will has been
proved and allowed, the court shall issue letters
testamentary to the person named as executor in
the will. In intestate proceedings, after the publication
of the notice of the hearing and after the hearing,
the court shall issue letters of administration to
the person it finds competent.

5) FILING AND APPROVAL OF CLAIMS AGAINST
ESTATE. Money claims filed against the ostate.
(R86). Non-money claims filed against the executor
or administrator in ordinary action. (R87),

29

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
6)

PAYMENT OF DEBTS, ETC. Payment of debts,

estate tax, funeral charges, administration expenses,
and allowance to the widow and minor or
incapacitated children.
7) DETERMINATION OF HEIRS AND DISTRIBUTION.

Court issues order determining the heirs and
distributing the remainder of the estate

8) CLOSURE. Proceedings deemed terminated only
after payment of all debts and delivery of the
remaining estate to the heirs.
Q.

May a will pass personal and real property without
being probated?

A,

No. No will shall pass either real or personal estate
unless it is proved and allowed in the proper court
(S1R75).

Q.

After Lulu's death, her heirs brought her last will
to a lawyer to obtain their respective shares in the
estate, The lawyer prepared a deed of partition
distributing Lulu's estate in accordance with the
terms of hor will. Is the act of the lawyer correct?
why? (05 Bar 05[1))

A.

No, the act of the lawyer is not correct.
Under S41 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in the
proper court. The Supreme Court has held that the
probate of a will is mandatory. (Guevara v. Guevara,
74 Phil. 479 [1943]). Extrajudicial settlement is not
proper if the decedent left a will. (S1 R74)

30

RULE 75

Production of Will:
Allowance of Will Necessary
Q.

The heirs of H agree among themselves that they

will honor the division of H's estate as indicated
In her Last Will and Testament. To avoid the
expense of going to court in a Petition for Probate
of the Will, can they instead execute an Extrajudicial
Settlement Agreement among themselves? Explain
briefly. (07 Bar Q8b).

A

No, the heirs of H cannot execute an extrajudicial
settlement.
Under S1 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in the
proper court. The Supreme Court has held that the
probate of a will is mandatory. (Guevara v. Guevara,
74 Phil. 479), Extrajudicial settlement is not proper i'
the decedent left a will. (S1 R74).

Q.

The last will and testament of the deceased was
presented in the proceeding to settle his estate
and in due course hearing was set for the probate
of the will. Before evidence thereon could be
presentod, the legal heirs of the deceased, his
widow and two surviving daughters, filed a
manifestation that the probate of the will would no
longer be necessary since they had already agreed
to divide the net estate differently in accordance
with a project of partition attached to their
manifestation. Consequently, they moved that the
project of partition be approved and forthwith
implemented without probate of the decedent's
will. Should the court grant the heirs' motion and
accordingly approve their project of partition
without probate of the will? Explain. (92 Bar 09).

A.

No, the heirs of H cannot execute an extrajudicial
settlement.

31

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

Under S1 R75, no will shall pass either real or
personal estate unless it is proved and allowed in the
proper court. The Supreme Court has held that the
probate of a will is mandatory. (Guevara v. Guevara,
74 Phil. 479). Partitioning the estate without probating
the will is thus improper, regardless of whether the
partition would or would not be in accordance with the
provisions of the will. (S1 R74).
Q.

The will of a deceased wife was allowed probate
upon the petition of the executor, her husband,
and the estate of the wife distributed in accordance
with the will, Two years later, the husband was
charged with the crime of falsification for allegedly
forging the signature of the wife in the will, Will
the charge prosper? (99 Bar Q11b).

A.

No. Subject to the right of appeal, the allowance of
the shall be conclusive as to its due execution. (S1
R75). Here, since the order allowing the will became final,
the same became conclusive as to the due execution
of the will. (Mercado v. Santos, 66 Phil. 215)

Q.

What Is the duty of the custodian of a will after he
knows of the testator's death?

A.

The person who has custody of a will shall, within 20
days after he knows of the testator's death, deliver the
will to the court having jurisdiction or to the executor
named in the will. (S2 R75).

Q.

What is the duty of the person named as executor
in the will after he knows of the testator's death or
after he knows that he was named as the executor?

A.

A person named as executor in a will, shall within 20
days:

32

RULE 75

Production of Will;
Allowance of Will Necessary

1) After he knows of the testator's death, or

2) After he knows that he is named executor if he
obtained such knowledge after the death of
the testator,

Present such will
to the court havin jurisdiction,
unless the will has reached the court in any other
manner, and shall, within such period, signify to the
court in writing his acceptance or refusal of the trust.

(S3 R75)
Q.

X has custody of the will of the deceased 0.
Although he knew of D's death, he failed, within
20 days from such knowledge, to deliver the same
to the probate court or to the executor named In
the will. May X be committed to prison?

A.

No. Xmay however be fined not exceeding P2,000 if
he is unable to proffer a satisfactory excuse to the
court. X may be committed to prison only if he was ordered
by the probate court to deliver the will and he neglects
without reasonable cause to do so. (S4&5 R76)

Q.

Alleging that his father passed away in 1992
leaving a holographic will, which is now in the
custody of his mother, Nixon filed with the RTC a
petition for mandamus with damages to compel
his mother to produce the will so that probate
proceedings for the allowance of the will could be
instituted. Was the filing of the petition for
mandamus proper?

33

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. This is because there is a plain, speedy, and
adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law, that
is, the filing of a petition for probate under S1 R76 and
then moving for the production of the will under S2-5
R75. Under S1 R76, an interested person may petition
the court having jurisdiction to have the will allowed,
whether the same be in his possession or not, or Is
lost or destroyed. (Uy v. Lee, G.R. No, 176831, 15
January 2010), It also appears that Nixon had a
photocopy of the will, This would have been sufficient
to prove the holographic will.

34

RULE 76. ALLOWANCE OR
DISALLOWANCE OF WILL
Q.

Who may petition for the allowance of a will?

(LIED T)
A.

Any executor, devisee, or legatee named in a will, or
any other person interested in the estate, may, at any
time after the death of the testator, petition the court
having jurisdiction to have the will allowed.

The testator himself may, during his lifetime,
petition the court for the allowance of the will. This is
known as an ante-mortem probate. (S1 R76),
Q.

Aside from the executor, devisee, or legatee, who
else are interested in the estate?
.

A.

A creditor of the decedent is an interested person. An
heir is an interested person but one who has assigned
or renounced his hereditary rights has no legal interest
as would authorize him to initiate probate proceedings.
(Duran v. Duran, L-23372, 14 June 1967)

Q.

May an interested person petition for the
allowance of the will even if he does not have
possession of the will or even if the will is lost or
destroyed?

A.

Yes. ($1 R76)

Q.

What are the contents of a petition for the
allowance of a will?

A.

A petition for the allowance of a will must show, so far
as known to the petitioner: (JuN VaLeC)
1) The jurisdictional facts;

35

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

2)

The names, ages, and residence of the heirs,
legatees, and devisees of the testator or decedent;

3) The probable value and character of the property
of the estate;

Q.

4)

The name of the person for whom letters are
prayed; and

5)

If the will has not been delivered to the court, the
name of the will's custodian. (S2 R76)

What are the jurisdictional facts required to be alleged
in the petition for probate of a will? (RED Value)

A.
(a) That a person died leaving a will,

(b) That, in the case of a resident, he died in his
residence within the territorial jurisdiction of the
court, or, in the case of a non-resident, that he left

an gs!ate within such territorial jurisdiction. (Palaganas
• Palaganas, 26 January 2011).
(c) The gross value of the estate. (Frianela v. Banayad,

30 July 2009).
Q.

Pedrillo, a Fi-Am permanent resident of Los Angeles,
California at the time of his death, bequeathed to
Winston a sum of money to purchase an annuity.

Upon Pedrillo's demise, his will was duly probated
in Los Angeles and the specified sum in the will

was in fact used to purchase an annuity with
XYZ of Hong Kong so that Winston would receive
the equivalent of US$1,000 per month for the next

15 years.
Wanting to receive the principal amount of

the annuity, Winston files for the probate of Pedrillo's
will In the Makati RTC, As prayed for, the court
names Winston as administrator of the estate.

36

RULE 76
Allowance or Disallowance of Will

Winston now files in the Makati RTC a motion

to compel XYZ to account for all sums in its
possession forming part of Pedrillo's estate. Rule

on the motion. (10 Bar Q15)
A.

The motion should be denied. The Supreme Court

has held that the writs and processes of a probate
court cannot extend outside the Philippines. Here XYZ
was in Hong Kong and thus beyond the jurisdiction of the
Philippine probate court.

Moreover the probate court should have dismissed
the petition at the onset. In a petition for probate of a

will where the testator is a non-resident, the petition
should allege the jurisdictional fact that the testator
left estate within the Philippines. (Cuenco v. Court of
Appeals, L-24742, 26 October 1973)
Q.

A.

Will a defect in the petltion render void the allowance
of the will?

No. No defect in the petition shall render void the

allowance of the will, or the issuance of letters
testamentary or of administration with the will annexed.
(S2 R76).

•

When a will is delivered to or a petition for the
allowance of the will is filed in the probate court,
what shall the court do?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for proving the will
when all concerned may appear to contest the
allowance thereof, and shall cause notice of such time
and place to be published 3 weeks successively,
previous to the time appointed, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the province. (S3 R76).

37

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

a.

When shall newspaper publication not be made?

A

No newspaper publication shall be made where the
petition for probate has been filed by the testator
himself. (S3 R76)

Q.

ls notice of the hearing required to be mailed or
personally served? If so to whom?

A.

Yes, In the situation provided for by S4 R76. Such
notice shall be given as follows:
NOTICE BY MAIL, The court shall cause copies
of the notice of the time and place fixed for proving
the will to be addressed to the designated or other
known heirs, legatees, and devisees of the testator
resident in the Philippines at their places of residence,
and deposited in the post office with the postage
thereon prepaid at least 20 days before the hearing, if
such places of residence be known.

A copy of the notice must in like manner be
mailed to the person named as executor, it he be not
the petitioner, also, to any person named as co-executor
not petitioning, if their places of residence be known."
PERSONAL SERVICE. Personal service of
copies of the notice at least 10 days before the
hearing shall be equivalent to malling. (S4 R76).
Q.

ls the 10 and 20-day notice requirement in S4 R76
mandatory?

A.

Yes. (Racca • Echague, 20 January 2021, Gesmundo, J.).

Compare with S4 R79, where notice is required to be given to the known
heirs, creditors, and other persons believed to have an interest in the estate

38

RULE 76
Allowance or Disallowance of Will

Q.

When shall personal notice be sent only to the
compulsory helrs?

A.

If the testator asks for the allowance of his own will,
personal notice shall be sent only to the compulsory
heirs. (S4 R76), No newspaper publication shall be
made. (S3 R76)

Q.

What must be shown before the introduction of
testimony in support of the will?

A,

There must be a showing of compliance with the
provisions of S3 and S4 R76 regarding publication
and notice. (S5 R76)
'
ls mere publication of the notice enough to confer
jurisdiction on the court?

Q.

A.

It depends. Publication is sufficient and personal
notice is not necessary when the addresses of the
heirs, legatees, devisees, and the executor are not
known or the address given in the petition is wrong.

Where such addresses are known, personal and individual
notice to them is mandatory and jurisdictional. (De
Aranz v. Galing, 161 SCRA 628 [1988])).° Personal
notice to the heirs whose places of residence are
known is mandatory. Courts cannot simply abdicate
their duty under S4 R76 by indiscriminately applying
the rule on publication. To do so would render nugatory
the procedure laid down in S4 and the purpose for
which it was intended. (Racca v. Echague, 20 January
2021, Gesmundo, J.).

a Leriou • Lona, 8 October 2018, it was stated tat personal notice
under S4 76 is not jurisdictional but a matter of personal convenience slco
publication under S3 R7 already vests the court with junrsdiction over all
interested persons. The statement sould be considered as obiter or pro ha¢
vie since the heirs in Leriou were ror-residents and thus not entitled to the
personal notice or notice by mall under S4 R76

39

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Proof for the allowance of a will
0.

Where the will in uncontested, what is the
required proof?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL. If no person appears lo contest the
allowance of the will, the court may grant allowance
on the testimony of pne of the subscribing witnesses
only, if such witness testify that the will was executed
as Is required by law. (S5 R76).
If the subscribing witness does not reside in the

province, the court may authorize the taking of his
deposition and that a photocopy be presented to the
deponent on examination. (S7 R76),
If the subscribing witnesses are dead, insane, or
do not reside in the Philippines, the court may admit
the testimony of other witnesses to prove the sanity of
the testator and the due execution of the will. As
evidence of the execution of the will, it may admit
proof of the testator's handwriting and of the subscribing
witnesses or any of them. (S8 R76)
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL. Testimony of one witness
whoknows the handwriting and signature of the
testator and who explicitly declares that the will and
the signature are in the testator's handwriting. In the
absence of such and if the court deems it necessary,
expert testimony may be resorted to. (S5 R76)

Where the testator himself petitions for the
probate of his holographic will, the fact that he affirms
that the holographic will and the signature are in his
own handwriting shall be sufficient evidence of the
genuineness and due execution thereof. (S12 R76),

40

RULE 76

Allowance or Disallowance of Will

Q.

Where the will is contested, what is the required
proof?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL AII the subscribing witnesses and
the notary public if present in the Philippines and not
insane must be produced and examined and the
death, absence, or incapacity of any of them must be
satisfactorily shown to the court.
If all or some of such witnesses are present in
the Philippines but outside the province where the will
has been filed, their deposition must be taken.

If any or all of them testify against the due
execution of the will, or do not remember having
attested to it, or are otherwise of doubtful credibility,
the will may nevertheless be allowed if the court is
satisfied from the testimony of other witnesses and
from all the evidence presented that the will was
executed and attested in the manner required by law
(S11 R76)
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL. The will shall be allowed
if at least 3 witnesses who know the handwriting of
the testator explicitly declare that the will and the
signature are in the testator's handwriting. In the
absence of any competent witness, and if the court
deem it necessary, expert testimony may be resorted
to. (S11 R76).
Where the testator himself petitions for the
probate of his holographic will, the fact that he affirms
that the holographic will and the signature thereon are
in his own handwriting shall be sufficient evidence of
the genuiness and the due execution thereof. The
burden of disproving the genuineness and due execution
shall be on the contestant. The testator may, In his
turn, present such additional proof as may be necessary
to rebut the contestant's evidence, ($12 R76)

41

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
Q.

The oppositor was against the allowance of the
holographic will on the ground that the testatrix's
signature to the will was procured by undue
influence and that the testatrix did not seriously
intend the instrument to be her last will, The
proponent presented only one witness who knew
the testariy's handwriting and signature and who
explicitly declared that the will and the signature
are in the testarix's handwriting. ls this sufficient
evidence for the allowance of the will?

A.

Yes. The Supreme Court has held that to contest a
will means to challenge the authenticity thereof. Here
since the challenge was based on undue influence
and lack of testamentary intent but did not otherwise
attack the will's authenticity, the testimony of ore
competent witness was sufficient. (See Aza0la v.
Singson, 109 Phil. 102)

0.

In the probate of a holographic will, the oppositors
alleged that the holographic will was a forgery.
The proponent presented two witnesses who
knew the testatrix's handwriting and signature
and who explicitly declared that the will and the
signature are in the testarix's handwriting. Is this
sufficient evidence for the allowance of the will?

A.

No. Since the will was contested (it being alleged that
the testatrix's signature was a forgery), the presentation
of 3 competent witnesses is mandatory. The presentation
of only two competent witnesses is not enough; the
proponent should have resorted to expert testimony.
(Codoy v. Calugay, 312 SCRA 333).

Q.

Are persons convicted of falsification of a
document, perjury, or false testimony disqualified
from being witnesses in court?

42

RULE 76
Allowance or Disallowance of \Will

A.

No. The disqualification under Article 821 refers to
disqualification merely as an attesting and subscribing
witness to the will under Article 805 of the Civil Code

and not to disqualification as a witness in court.
Hence such persons can still testify in the probate of a
will although obviously not as attesting and subscribing
witnesses.

Proof in case of lost or destroyed will
Q.

May a lost or destroyed will be proved?

A.

Yes. (S6 R76)

Q.

What is the proof of a lost or destroyed will?

A.

NOTARIAL WILL.
Foundational evidence on:
1)

The execution and validity of the will, and

2)

The existence of the will at the time of the
testator's death, or that the same was fraudulently
or accidentally destroyed during the testator's
lifetime without his knowledge.

Secondary evidence.
At least two credible witnesses by which the
provisions of the will are clearly and distinctly proved.
(S6 R76). A photocopy of the will is admissible.

HOLOGRAPHIC WILL.

Foundational evidence: Same as for notarial will
(by analogy from S6 R76).

43

PRIMER. REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

Secondary evidence: The Supreme Court has
held that a photocopy is admissible to prove a lost or
destroyed holographic will. Testimonial evidence is
however not admissible as secondary evidence because
of the great risk of fraud or mistake. (Gan v. Yap, 104
Phil 509; Rodelas v. Aranza, 119 SCRA 16).

Disallowance of wlll
Q.

What are the grounds for the disallowance of a will?

A.

The will shall be disallowed in any of the following
cases: (EDIFUMI)

1)

If not @executed and attested as required by law;

2)

If the testator was insane or otherwise mentally
incapable to make a will at the time of its
execution;

3)

If it was executed under duress, or the influence
of fear, or threats;

4)

If it was procured by undue and improper pressure
and influence, on the part of the beneficiary, or of
some other person for his benefit;

5)

If the signature of the testator was procured by
fraud; or

6)

If the testator acted by mistake or did not intend
that the instrument he signed should be his will at
the time of affixing his signature thereto. (S9 R76;
Article 839, Civil Code).

Note; The presence of any of the above circumstances
renders the will void not merely voidable. There is no
such thing as a voidable will. (RUBEN F. BALANE,
JOTTINGS AND JURISPRUDENCE IN CIVIL LAW
200 [2002 rev. ed]).
44

RULE 76
Allowance or Dlsallowance of Will

0.

During probate proper stage, may the probate
court pass upon the question of whether a
testamentary disposition is void?

A.

No. The rule is that during the probate proper stage,
i.e., the stage where the court will rule on whether to

allow or disallow the will, the court can pass only upon
the extrinsic validity of the will, that is, whether the will
complied with the formalities prescribed by law and
whether the testator had testamentary capacity. The
intrinsic validity of the will will be passed upon by the
probate court only during the stage for the determination
of the heirs and the distribution of the estate. (Pastor
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 56340, 24 June 1983)
Q.

Maria, to spite her husband Jorge, whom she
suspected was having an affair with another
woman, executed a will, unknown to him,
bequeathing all the properties she inherited from
her parents to her sister Miguela. Upon her death,
the will was presented for probate. Jorge opposed

probate of the will on the ground that the will was
executed by his wife without his knowledge, much
less consent, and that It deprived him of his
legitime. After all, he had given her no cause for
disinheritance, added Jorge in his opposition.
How will you rule on Jorge's opposition to the
probate of Maria's will, if you were the judge? (93
Bar Civil Law a7)
A.

If I were the judge, I will deny Jorge's opposition to
the probate of Maria's will.
The Supreme Court has held that during the
probate of a will, the probate court can pass only
upon the extrinsic validity of the will.

45

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here the ground that the will deprived Jorge of
his legitime relates to the will's intrinsic validity which
the probate court will pass upon only during the
determination of the heirs and the distribution stage
but not during the probate of the will, Hence Jorge's
opposition should be denied

The ground that the will was executed without
the knowledge or consent of Jorge 1s not even a
ground to attack the validity of the will, whether
extrinsic or intrinsic, since a will is not a contract but a
unilateral act of the testator.
Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that the probate
court during the probate proper stage may pass
only upon the extrinsic validity of the will?

A.
1)

Where the defect of the will is apparent on its face
and the probate of the will would become a
useless ceremony if it is intrinsically invalid. An
example would be where the testator instituted
the petitioner as universal heir and completely
preterited her surviving heirs. (Nuguid v. Nuguid,
17 SCRA 449)

2)

If the will oes not contain legacies or devises.
The reason is that the annulment of the institution
of heirs would result in the total abrogation of the
will leading to intestacy. Therefore, the conduct of
separate proceedings to determine the intrinsic
validity of its testamentary provisions would be
superfluous. (Morales • Olondriz, 783 SCRA 151
(2016] Brion, J.)

3) Where the parties agree that the intrinsic validity
be first determined. (Nepomuceno v. Court of
Appeals, 139 SCRA 206).
46

RULE 76
Allowance or Disallowance of WIN

0.

H died leaving a last will and testament wherein it
is stated that he was legally married to W by
whom he had two legitimate children A and B, H
devised to his said forced heirs the entire estate
except the free portion which he gave to X who
was living with him at the time of his death. In
sald will H explained that he had been estranged
from his wife W for more than 20 years and he has
been living with X as man and wife since his
separation from his legitimate family. In the
probate proceedings, X asked for the issuance of
letters testamentary in accordance with the will
wherein she is named as sole executrix. This was
opposed by W and A and B. Assume that the will
had been executed in accordance with the formalities
required by law.

a) ls the will intrinsically valid?

b)

May the probate court disallow the will? (90
Bar Civil Law Q9ed).

A.

a) No, the will is not intrinsically valid
Under Article 1028 of the Civil Code in relation to
Article 739 of the Civil Code, testamentary dispositions
between persons who were guilty of adultery or
concubinage at the time of such disposition are void.
Here the testamentary disposition was made
between H and X who were guilty of adultery and/or
concubinage. Considering that the will has only one
testamentary disposition, since legitimes are already
provided for by law, the will is entirely void

47

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
b) The court may disallow the will

The general rule is that a probate court during
the probate proper stage cannot pass upon the
intrinsic validity of the will. However where the defect
of the will is apparent on its face, the court may pass
upon its intrinsic validity since the probate of the will
would become a useless ceremony.

Here the defect of the will is apparent on its face

since the will itself stated that the devisee was a
paramour of the testator. Hence the court may
disallow the will. (Nepomuceno v. Court of Appeals,
139 SCRA 206 [1985])
Q.

Iris Morales filed a petition with the RTC alleging
that the decedent left a will dated 23 July 1991.
Morales prayed for the probate of the will and for

her appointment as special administratrix.
The pertinent portion of the will reads as
follows:
Upon my death, IRIS MORALES OLONDRIZ

shall be the executor hereof and administrator of
my estate until its distribution In accordance
herewith.
My entire estate shall be divided into six parts

to be distributed equally among and between (1) 1RIS
MORALES OLONDRIZ, my children (2) ALFONSO
JUAN OLONDRIZ, JR., (3) ALEJANDRO OLONDRIZ,
(4) ISABEL OLONDRLZ, (5) ANGELO OLONDRIZ, and
their mother (6) MARIA ORTEGAS OLONDRIZ, SR.
Notably, the will omitted Francisco Javier
Olondriz, an illegitimate son of the decedent.

During the hearing for the allowance of the will,
the court disallowed the wlll on the ground of

48

RULE 76
Allowance or Disallowance of Will

preterition, Was it proper for the court to pass
upon the issue of preterition during the probate
proper stage?

A.

Yes, wnile the general ruie is that in probate
proceedings, the scope of the court's inquiry is limited
to questions on the extrinsic validity of the will, this
rule is not inflexible and absolute. It is not beyond the
probate court's jurisdiction to pass upon the intrinsic
validity of the will when so warranted by exceptional
circumstances, like when practical considerations
demand that the intrinsic validity of the will be passed
upon even before it is probated for to do otherwise
may render the conduct of probate proceedings a

useless ceremony.
Here, the probate court can resolve the issue of
preterition considering that the will does not contain
specific legacies or devises since the effect of
preteritlon is the annulment of the institution of heirs.
The annulment effectively caused the total abrogatin
o of
the will, resulting in total intestacy of the inheritance.
The decedent's will, no matter how valid it may
appear extrinsically, is null and void. Therefore, the
conduct of separate proceedings to determine the
intrinsic validity of its testamentary provisions would
be superfluous. (Morales v. Olondriz, 783 SCRA 151
[2016], Brion, 4.)
Q.

Czarina died single. She left all her properties by
will to her friend Duqueza. In the will, Czarina
stated that she did not recognize Marco as an
adopted son because of his disrespectful conduct
towards her.
Duqueza soon instituted an action for probato
of Czarina's will. Marco, on the other hand,
instituted intestate proceedings. Both actions were
consolidated before the RTC of Pasig. On motion

49

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
of Marco, Duqueza's petition was ordered dismissed

on the ground that the will is void for depriving
him of his legitime. Argue for Duqueza. (10 Bar Q14).
A.

I would argue that the will is not void for there was no
preterition. Preterition applies only to inadvertent
omission in the will. Here there was no inadvertent
omission because Czarina mentioned Marco in the
will and made an ineffective disinheritance. Hence the
will was valid and should be given effect to the extent
that it does not impair Marco's legitime.
I would also argue that during the probate proper

stage, the probate court can pass only upon the
extrinsic, not the intrinsic, validity of the will. When

o

the court declared the will void for depriving Marco
his legitime, it was passing upon the intrinsic validity
of the will.

0.

What happens to the proceedings if the will is
disallowed?

A.

If an opposition with simultaneous petition for letters
of administration was filed, the court can continue the
proceedings as an intestate case. If no such petition
was filed, the court shall discontinue or suspend the
proceedings. A petition for letters of administration
may then be filed in the same or in a separate case."

Applying Dy analogy the procedure recommended in Uriarte , CFt of
Negros Occidental, 29 May 1970, where a will was discovered during the
penancy of the intestate proceedings. See also St 79

50

RULE 77. ALLOWANCE OF WILL PROVED
OUTSIDE OF THE PHILIPPINES AND
ADMINISTRATION OF ESTATE THEREUNDER
Q.

May a will proved and allowed in a foreign country
be allowed in our courts?

A.

Yes. A wil proved and allowed in a foreign country,
according to the laws of such country, may be
allowed, filed, and recorded by the proper Regional
Trial Court/MTC in the Philippines. (S1 R77)

Q.

May a will executed by a foreigner abroad be

probated in the Philippines although it has not
been previously probated and allowed in the
country where it was executed?
A.

Yes. Our laws do not prohibit the probate of wills
executed by foreigners abroad although the same
have not as yet been probated and allowed in the
countries of their execution. A foreign will can be
given legal effect in our jurisdiction. Article 816 of the
Civil Code states that the will of an alien who is
abroad produces effect in the Philippines if made in
accordance with the formalities prescribed by the law

of the place where he resides, or according to the
formalities observed in his country. While there is a
proceeding for reprobate provided for in R77, it does
not mean that a will not probated abroad cannot be
probated in the Philippines. R77 should be read in
conjunction with Article 816. (Palaganas vs. Palaganas,
640 SCRA 538 [2011], Abad, J.).
Q.

Which court has jurisdiction over a petition for

reprobate?

51

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

Either the RTC or the MTC, depending upon the
gross value of the estate. If such value exceeds
P300,000 (outside Metro Manila) or P400,000 (within
Metro Manila), it would be the RTC which would have
jurisdiction; otherwise it would be the MTC. (Sec
19[4], 8.P. Blg. 129)

Q.

Ifawill is proved and allowed in a foreign country,
would that be sufficient for the distribution of the
testator's property located in the Philippines?

A.

No. The will must be reprobated in the Philippines in
accordance with R77. This is because the powers and
processes of a probate court cannot ex proprio vigore
have any effect beyond the limits of the state in which
it was granted, (Collector of Internal Revenue v.
Fischer, 1 SCRA 93).

0.

Outline in brief the procedure for the reprobate of
a will proved abroad.

A.
1) The executor or other interested person shall file
with the court a duly authenticated copy of the will
and the order or decree of allowance.

2) The court shall fix a time and place for the hearing
and cause notice thereof to be given as in the
case of an original will presented for allowance.
3) At the proceedings for reprobate, the proponent
must prove.
a) That the testator was domiciled in the foreign
country,
b) That the will was admitted to probate in such
country,

52

RULE 77
Allowance of WII Proved Outside of the Philippines
And Administration of Estate Thereunder

c) That the foreign court was, under the laws of

said foreign country, a probate court with
jurisdiction over the proceedings,

d) The law on probate procedure in said foreign

country and proof of compliance therewith, and
e) The legal requirement in said foreign country

for the valid execution of the will. (2 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
32 [6 rev. ed., 2" printing]).
4) If it appears at the hearing that the will should be
allowed in the Philippines, a certificate of its

allowance shall be fled and recorded by the
clerk, and the will shall have the same effect as if
originally proved and allowed in such court.
5) The court shall grant letters testamentary, or letters
of administration with the will annexed, and such
letters shall extend to all the testator's estate in the

Philippines. Such estate, after payment of debts
and administration expenses, shall be disposed
of according to the will and the residue remitted to
the domicillary jurisdiction.
Q.

What is ancillary administration?

A.

Ancillary administration is the aministration of the
decedent's estate located in a country or jurisdiction
other than the decedent's last domicile. The administration
in the decedent's last domicile is known as the
principal administration, (Johannes v. Harvey, 43 Phil.
175) An ancillary administrator needs to be appointed
because the principal/domiciliary administrator does
not have the power to administer property outside of
the state or country which appointed him. (In re

Butler, 29 Nov, 1951)

53

RULE 78. LETTERS TESTAMENTARY
AND OF ADMINISTRATION,
WHEN AND TO WHOM ISSUED
Q.

What is the
proceedings?

initiatory

pleading

in

probate

A.
1) If a person dies testate, the initiatory pleading is a:
a) Petition for allowance of will and for letters
testamentary if there is an executor named in
the will, or
b) Petition for allowance of will and for letters of

administration with the will annexed, in case
there is a will but there is no executor named in
the will or the executor named in the will is
incompetent, refuses the appointment, or fails to

give a bond.

2) fa person dies intestate, the initiatory pleading
is a petition for letters of administration.
Q.

Who ls an executor?

A.

An executor is the person named in the will to
administer the decedent's estate and carry out the
provisions thereof.'

'Under At. 1060 0f the Cryit Code, a corporation or association authorize
to conduct the business of a trust company in the Philippines may be appointed
an executor or administrator. A'so under Sec 83 pf the General Banking Law, a
trust entity may be appointed as adrinistrator or act es an executor l named in
the wilt The trust entity acting as executor#administrator is exempt from posting a
bond, unless recuired by the court upon proper applcaton for special cause
(Sec.86)

54

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary
And of Administration

Q.

Who is an administrator?

A.

An administrator is the person appointed by the court
to administer the estate where the decedent died
intestate, or where the will was void and not allowed
to probate, or where no executor was named in the
will or the executor named therein is incompetent,
refuses the trust, or fails to give a bond. (BIRNI)

Q,

Who are incompetent to serve as executors or
administrators?

A.

The following are incompetent to serve as executors
or administrators (MNC):

1) Minor.
2) Non-resident.
3) In the gourt's opinion unfit to execute the duties of
the trust by reason of: drunkenness, jmprovidence,
want of understanding or integrity, or by reason

of conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude.
(CWID)
Q.

May a person convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude be competent to serve as executor or
administrator?

A.

Yes, if in the court's opinion he or she is fit to execute
the duties of the trust.

Q

In the proceedings for the settlement of the estate
of Ferdinand E Marcos before the RTC, the
government opposed the issuance of letters
testamentary to Bongbong Marcos on the ground
that he had been convicted of fallure to file
Income tax return. The government argued that
such conviction rendered Bongbong incompetent
to serve as executor.

55

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

a)

ls the government's contention correct?

b)

Assuming that the probate court ordered the

issuance of letters testamentary to Bongbong
Marcos, what would be the remedy of the
government?
A.

a)

No. Under Sec. 1(c) of Rule 78, no person Is
competent to serve as executor or administrator
who is in the court's opinion unfit to execute the
duties of the trust by reason of conviction of an

offense involving moral turpitude. The offense of

failure to file income tax return however is not one
involving moral turpitude since it is a malum
prohibitum in which criminal intent is immaterial.
(Republic v. Marcos, 4 August 2009)

b) The remedy of the govermmeni is to appeal the
order under Section 1(a) of Rule 109. Hence the
petition for review on certiorari filed with the SC was

the wrong mode and was properly dismissed. (ld.).
Q.

Andy is the executor of the estate of Ziggy. Andy
dies. In his will he namod Bert as his executor.
May Bert administer the estate of Ziggy?

A.

No. The executor of an executor shall not, as such,
administer the estate of the first testator. (S2 R78),
Upon the death of Andy, the probate court with
jurisdiction over Ziggy's estate shall appoint an
administrator. (S2 R82)

Q.

When shall the court issue letters testamentary to
the person named as executor in the will?

A.

When the will has been proved and allowed, the court
shall issue letters testamentary to the person named
as executor therein, If he is compelent, accepts the
trust, and gives bond as required under R81. (CAB)

56

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary
And of Administration

O.

When may the probate court issue letters of
administration?

A,

The probate court may issue letters of administration:
(BIRNI)
1) If no executor is named in the will.
2) The executor is incompetent, refuses the trust, or

fails to give bond.
3) A person dies intestate. (S6 R78)

Note that there should first be a petition for letters of

administration before the court may issue the letters.
Q.

To whom shall letters of administration be granted?

A,

The rules lay down the following order of preference:

(SNB RPC)
1) Surviving spouse

2) Next of kin."

3) Surviving spouse and next of kin,
4)

Person who the surviving spouse or next of kin
requests to have appointed.

5)

Principal creditor/s if the above neglect for 30 days
after the person's death to apply for administration or
to request that administration be granted to some

other person.

The text of S6 R78 seems to show that the survivirg spouse and the next
of kin are on tne same level in the order of preference. urisprudence however
indicates that the surviving spouse is first in the order of preference over the next
of kin. The reason ls the greater interest of the surviving spouse since he or she
is not only entitled to the estate of the deceased spouse but also to his or her
one-half share in the conjugal or absolute community of property.(Gabriel v
Yuzon, 7 August 1992, Regalado, J)

57

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

6)
Q.

Person as the court may select, if no principal
creditor competent and willing to serve. (S6 R78),

May the probate court disregard the order of
preference in S6 R78?

A.

Yes, the probate court may for valid cause disregard
such order of preference. For instance if in the court's
opinion the surviving spouse is incompetent by
reason of want of understanding or integrity, the court
may appoint a next of kin as the administrator.

Q.

Should the executor or administrator file the
letters testamentary or the letters of administration
with the register of deeds?

Yes. Before the executor or administrator of the
estate of the deceased owner of registered land may
deal with the same, he shall file with the office of the

Register of Deeds a certified copy of his letters of
administration or if there is a will, a certified copy
thereof and the order allowing the same, together with
the letters testamentary or of administration with the
will annexed, as the case may be, and shall produce

the duplicate certificate of title. (S87 Property Registration
Decree).
Q.

Emilio was not appointed as the administrator of

his grandmother's estate, although he claims
rights as an heir, What are his remedies in order
to protect his interests in the estate?

A.

The remedies available to an an "interested person
or "any person interested in the estate" are the
following:
1) Section 6 of Rule 87, which allows an individual
interested in the estate of the deceased "to complain
to the court of the concealment, embezzlement,

58

RULE 78
Letters Testamentary
And of Administration
or conveyance of any asset of the decedent, or of

evidence of the decedent's title or interest therein,"
2) Section 10 of Rule 85, which requires notice of the
time and place of the examination and allowance

of the administrator's account "to persons interested;"
3)

Section 7(b) of Rule 89, which requires the court
to give notice "to the persons interested" before it

may hear and grant a petition seeking the
disposition or encumbrance of the properties of
the estate; and
4)

Section 1, Rule 90, which allows "any person
interested in the estate" to petition for an order for
the distribution of the residue of the estate of the
decedent, after all obligations are either satisfied
or provided for.

5)

Section 2 of Rule 82 which provides that the
probate court may remove or accept the resignation
of an executor/administrator on ground of
incapacity or unsuitability to discharge the trust.
(Suntay v. Cojuangco-Suntay, 10 October 2012)

59

RULE 79. PETITION AND CONTEST FOR
LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION
Q.

Who may oppose the issuance of letters
testamentary and how does one oppose? May the
oppositor at the same time file a petition for
letters of administration with the will annexed?

A.

Any person interested in the will may state in writing
the grounds why letters testamentary should not issue
to the persons named therein as executors, or any of
them. A petition may at the same time be filed for letters
of administration with the will annexed (simultaneous
petition for administration).
Note that the oppositor cannot seek the issuance
of letters of administration in the opposition itself. He
must file a petition. Compare with S4 R79.

Q.

Who may file a petition for letters of administration
and what are the contents thereof?

A.

A petition for letters of administration must be filed by
an interested person and must show so far as known
to the petitioner:
1) The jurisdictional facts;
2) The names, ages, and residences of the heirs, and
the names and residences of the creditors;
3) The probable value and character of the property
of the estate; and
4)

The name of the person for whom letters of
administration are prayed. (S2 R79).

60

RULE 79
Petition and Contest
For Letters of Administration

Q.

What ls the meaning of an "interested person"?

A.

An interested person is one who stands to benefit
from the distribution of the estate as in the case of an
heir or one who has a claim against the estate, as in

the case of a creditor of the deceased, The interest
must be material and direct and not merely indirect or
contingent. (San Luis v. San Luis, G.R. No. 133743, 6
February 2007). Thus a claimant whose right depends
the disallowance of the second will and the incapacity
of the legatees in the first will to inherit is not an

interested party since his interest depends upon a
contingency. (Espinosa v. Barrios, 7O Phil. 311)

0.

Domenico and Gen lived without the benefit of
marriage for twenty years, during which time they
purchased properties together. After Domenico
died without a will, Gen filed a petition for letters
of administration. Domenico's siblings opposed
the same on the ground that Gen has no legal
personality. Decide. (08 Bar Q18).

A.

Opposition denied
The Supreme Court has held that a person who
has cohabited with another is a co-owner of the
properties acquired through their joint efforts during
the cohabitation pursuant to Articles 147 and 148 of
the Family Code and that such co-ownership would
qualify her as an interested person within the purview
of $2 R79. (San Luis v. San Luis, G.R. No. 133743,
6 February 2007).

(Note: The ruling in San Luis seems arguable.
The interest of the person who has cohabited with
another is not on the estate of the deceased party but
on her share of the co-ownership. She does not stand
to benefit from the estate of the deceased party. She
would have legal personality to bring an action for
partition but not for settlement of estate.)

61

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Will a defect in the petition render void the
issuance of letters of administration?

A.

No. (S2 R79)

Q.

When a petition for letters of administration is
filed in the probate court, what shall the court do?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for hearing the
petition, and shall cause notice thereof to be given to
the known heirs and creditors fo the decedent, and to
any other persons believed to have an interest in the

estate, in the manner proved for in S3 (publication)
and 4 (mail or personal service) of R76. (S3 R79).
Q.

Who and how may one oppose the petition for
administration?

A.

Any interested person may,

by filing a written

opposition, contest the petition on the ground of the

incompetency of the person for whom letters are
prayed therein, or on the ground of the contestant's
own right to the administration, and may pray that
letters issue to himself, or to any competent person or
persons named In the opposition. (S4 R79)
Note that unlike in an opposition to the issuance
of letters testamentary (S1 R79), the oppositor to a
petition for letters of administration may seek the
issuance of letters of administration to himself or to
any competent person/s named in the opposition itself.

Only an heir or creditor can oppose the issuance
of letters of administration as they are the only ones
who would be benefited by the estate. (Chua v. Court
of Appeals, 287 SCRA 33). Hence an heir who has
assigned his hereditary rights before settlement

Compare with S4 R7 where notice is required to be given to the known

heirs, legatees, devlsees, and executor (if not the petitioner), but not to the creditors

62

RULE 79
Petition and Contest
For Letters of Administration

proceedings were commenced, is no longer an
interested person qualified to file or oppose a petition
for letters of administration.
Q.

When may letters of administration be granted to
any qualified applicant?

A.

Letters of administration may be granted lo any
applicant, though it appears that there are other competent
persons having better right to the administration, if
such persons fail to appear when notified and claim
the issuance of letters to themselves. (S6 R79).

Q.

What should the probate court do if in the course
of the intestate proceedings, a will is discovered?

t

Tie probate court should discontinue or suspen
proceedings and direct the filing of a petition for
allowance of the will. Such petition may be filed in the
same or in a different case. The reason for this rule is

that testate proceedings take precedence over
intestate proceedings. Should the will be allowed, the
probate proceedings shall be terminated and any

letters of administration issued shall be revoked.
(Uriarte v. CFI of Negros Occidental, 29 May 1970)

63

RULE 80. SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR
Q.

What are the ground for the appointment of a
special administrator?

A.

The court may appoint a special administrator to take
possession and charge of the estate:

a) When there is a delay in granting letters
testamentary or of administration by any cause
including an appeal from the
dlsallowance of a will. (S1 RBO).
b)

allowance or

If the executor or administrator has a claim against
the estate he represents, the court shall appoint a

special administrator for the adjustment of the
claim (S8 R86).

Q.

Pending appeal from the appointment of a regular
administrator, may the court appoint a special
administrator?

A.

No, because the administrator-appointee should be
the administrator pending appeal from his appointment.
(Relucio v. San Jose, 81 Phil. 365).

Q

Where there is a dispute or disagreement as to
who should be appointed regular administrator, may
the probate court appoint a special administrator?

A.

Yes if such disagreement results in the undue delay in
the issuance of letters of administration. (Ocampo v.
Ocampo, 623 SCRA 559 [20101),

Q.

What are the powers and duties of a special
administrator?

A.

The special administrator shall take possession and
charge of the estate and preserve the same for the
executor or administrator afterwards appointed. For
64

RULE 80
Special Administrator

this purpose he may commence and maintain suits.
(S2 R80)
Q.

What are the restrictions on the powers and
duties of the special administrator?

A.

He may sell only such perishable and other property
as the court orders sold. He shall not be liable to pay
any debts of the deceased unless so ordered by the
court. (S2 R80).

Q.

When do the powers of the special administrator
cease?

A.

The powers of the special administrator shall cease
when lotters testamentary or of administration are
granted on the estate. He shall forthwith deliver to the
executor or administrator the goods and the estate of
the deceased in his hands. (S3 R8O)

Q.

May the executor or administrator prosecute to
final judgment suits which had been commenced
by the special administrator?

A.

Yes. (S3 R80),

Q.

May the court appoint a special administrator
prior to the publication of the notice of hearing on
the petition for settlement of the estate?

A.

No, because prior to such publication the court has
not yet acquired jurisdiction over persons interested in
the estate. (De Guzman v. Angeles, 162 SCRA 347)

Q.

Do the statutory preferences in the appointment
of a regular administrator apply to the appointment
of a special administrator?

A.

No. The court should not however exercise its discretion
whimsically.

65

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When

the

trial

court

appointed

a

special

administrator, one of the heirs elevated the case

to the Court of Appeals alleging that the RTC
erred in not following the order of preference
prescribed by the Rules and that the RTC should
have designated one of the heirs and not a third
party as administrator, The CA held that the
appointment of special administrator is interlocutory
and not appealable nor subject to certiorari. What

is the nature of an order appointing a special
administrator? May such order be appealed?
A.

The appointment of a special administrator is
interlocutory and discretionary on the part of the RTC
and non-appealable. (S1[] R109). However, it can be
subject to certiorari if it can be shown that the
appointment was made with grave abuse of discretion.
(Jamero vs. Melicor, 26 May 2005)

66

RULE 81. BONDS OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
0.

ls the executor or administrator required to give a
bond before he enters upon the execution of his
trust and before letters testamentary or of
administration shall issue?

A.

Yes. The bond shall be in such sum as the court
directs. (S1 R81).

0.

What are the conditions of the bond?

A.

The bond is conditioned as follows; (APIA)

1)

INVENTORY. The executor/administrator shall
submit to the court within 3 months after his
receipt of letters testamentary or of administration"
an inventory and appraisal of all the estate of the
deceased which shall come to his possession

or knowledge.
2)

ADMINISTRATION. The executor/administrator

shall administer the estate and from the proceeds
to pay and discharge all debts, legacies, and
charges on the same, or such dividends thereon

as shall be decreed by the court.
3)

ACCOUNTING. The executor/administrator shall

render a true and Just account of his administration
to the court within 1 year from receipt of letters

testamentary or of administration,'' and at any
other time when required by the court.

Although $1 RB3 states "[wthin three months after his appointment," this
shout be tead as within three months fror the tire of receiving letters
testamentary or of administration," adopting the more precise phraseology in S8 R85

"s8 R85

67

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

4)

PERFORMANCE OF COURT ORDERS. The

executor/administrator shall perform all court orders.
(S1 R81).
Q.

If the testator in his will directs that the executor
serve without bond or with only his individual
bond, Is the executor still required to give bond?

A.

Yes. The executor may be allowed by the court to

give bond in such sum and with such surety as the
court approves conditioned only to pay the debts of
the testator, The court may however require the
executor to post a further bond in case of a change of
circumstances, or for other sufficient cause, with the
conditions provided for in S1 R81. (S2 RR82).

0.

A.

ls the 3-month period for the executor/administrator
to file the inventory mandatory or jurisdictional?

No. The 3-month period is not mandatory. After the
filing of the petition for letters of administration and
the publication of the notice of hearing, the probate
court acquires jurisdiction over the estate and retains
that jurisdiction until the proceeding is closed. The
fact that the inventory was filed after the 3-month
period would not deprive or oust the probate court of
jurisdiction to approve it. The executor's/administrator's

unexplained delay in filing the inventory may be a
ground for his removal (Cuizon v. Ramolete, 129
SCRA 495)
Q.

A.

ls the probate court's determination of the properties
included and excluded from the inventory final?
No. While the probate court has jurisdiction to

determine whether or not the properties included in
the inventory or excluded therefrom belong prima
facie to the deceased, such a determination is not final
and without prejudice to the right of the interested
party to raise in a proper action the question of

68

RULE 81
Bonds of Executors
And Administrators

ownership. (Reyes v. Mosqueda, 187 SCRA 661)
The making of the inventory is therefore of a
preliminary and provisional nature and is not absolutely
decisive of the rights of all persons in interest.

0.

A and B are brothers. Their late father, during his
lifetime, donated his only real estate property to
B. Thereafter, B sold the property to C who had it
titled. C died intestate and was survived by his
son, D. A, claiming that his legitime had been
impaired, filed a case for annulment of donation
and sale, cancellation of title and recovery of
possession of the property before Branch 85 of
the Regional Trial Court. D filed a motion to dismiss
the complaint on the ground that there is a pending
intestate estate proceeding before Branch 87
involving the estate of C, his father, which
included the subject real property. A opposed the
motion arguing that Branch 85 has jurisdiction
since ownership of the land is involved and the
said branch has jurisdiction to resolve the question
of ownership. As judge of Branch 85, resolve the
motion to dismiss.

A.

I would deny the motion to dismiss. The Supreme
Court has held that a probate court has no jurisdiction
over the question of title to properties. Such question
should be resolved in a separate action. (Pizarro v.
Court of Appeals, L-31979, 6 August 1980).

Q.

A probate court issued a writ of possession in
favor of an heir and against a third person. May
the Supreme Court on appeal pass upon the propriety
of the issuance of the writ of possession?

A.

Yes. The probate court's issuance of a writ of
possession in favor of heir and against a third person
is beyond a probate court's jurisdiction. A probate
court exercises but limited jurisdiction and thus has no
69

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
power to take cognizance of and determine the issue
of title to proporty claimed by a third person adversely
to the decedent. The Supreme Court can pass on this

issue even if not raised by the parties and nullify the writ
because the issue is jurisdictional. (S8 R51; Constantio
n
v. Benitez, 10 February 2021, Carandang, J.)
Q.

A.

May the court waive the executor's/administrator's
duty to render an accounting?

No, The duty of an administrator to render an
accounting is not a mere incident of an administration
proceeding which can be waived or disregarded when
the same is terminated, It is a duty that has to be

performed and duly acted upon by the court before
the administration is finally closed and terminate0
(Joson v. Joson, 2 SCRA 82)
Q.

Are the sureties on the bond entitled to notice of

the settlement of the account of an executor/
administrator?

A.

No, since the surety is considered privy to the
proceedings against his principal. The surety may
however be allowed to intervene in such settlement.
Under S11 R85 upon the settlement of the account of
an executor/administrator, a person liable as surety
on such account may, upon application, be admitted
as party to such accounting.

Q.

In exercising acts of administration, does the
executor/administrator need prior leave of court?

A.

No. The administrator has the power to administer the
estate for purposes of liquidation and distribution; he
may therefore exercise all acts of administration without
special court authority and this includes leasing the
property since leasing is an act of administration. (San
Diego v. Nombre, 11 SCRA 165 [1964]; Mananquil v
Villegas, 189 SCRA 335)

70

RULE 81

Bonds of Executors
And Administrators
Q.

May an administrator appoint himself as agent to
sell estate property?

A.

No. It would be improper for the administrator to
appoint himself as agent to sell estate property even if
he proves benefit to be derived by the estate. A
contrary rule would open the door to fraud and
mismanagement. (Jaroda • Cusi, 28 SCRA 108).

Q.

May an executor/administrator without prior court
approval borrow money in behalf of the estate?

A.

No. An administrator has no authority without prior
court approval to borrow money in behalf of the
estate. He is not authorized to contract debts and
establish obligations to the injury and prejudice of the
heirs, and in case the administrator has so acted, he
alone will be responsible with his own property for the
debts contracted by him. (Fabie v. Yulo, 24 Phil. 240).

Q.

What is the nature of the bond posted by the
executor or administrator?

A.

It is in effect a performance or fidelity bond, intended
to indemnify the creditors and heirs and to assure the
faithful performance of the executor's or administrator's
trust.

Q.

An executor fraudulently misappropriated the estate
of the deceased. How may an heir or credltor
enforce the surety's liability under the bond?

A.

Liability under the bond may be enforced either in an
ordinary civil action or in the same administration
proceedings.

Q.

In an action or motion to enforce liability under
the bond, may the surety raise the defense that
the bond was not renewed or that the premiums
thereon have not been paid?
71

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The surety's liability under the bond is continuing

for as long as the executor or administrator has duties
to perform as such. (Luzon Surety Co. v, Quebral,
127 SCRA 295). Furthermore under Section 177 of
the Insurance Code, the suretyship shall be binding
notwithstanding nonpayment of the premium where
the obligee has accepted the bond.

Q.

In order to enforce llability under the bond, may
the probate court issue writs of execution?

A.

Yes, the probate court may issue writs of execution
on the bond and against the sureties as a necessary
incident of its jurisdiction over the estate proceedings.
(Cosme de Mendoza v. Pacheco, 64 Phil. 134).

Q.

Is aspecial administrator required to post a bond?

A.

Yes, before entering upon the duties of his trust, the
special administrator shall give a bond, in such sum
as the court directs, conditioned that: (AID)

1)

INVENTORY. He will make and return a true
inventory of the estate of the deceased which
come to his possession or knowledge.

2)

ACCOUNT. He will truly account for estate or
property received by him when required by the

court.
3)

DELIVERY. He will deliver the estate or property
received by him to the person appointed executor
or administrator, or to such other person as may
be authorized to receive them. (S4 R81).

72

RULE 82. REVOCATION OF
ADMINISTRATION, DEATH, RESIGNATION,
AND REMOVAL OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

What is the effect on a pending intestate
proceeding if subsequently a will is discovered

and allowed?
A.

If after letters of administration have been granted on
the estate of a decedent as if he had died intestate,
his will is proved and allowed by the court, the letters
of administration shall be revoked and all powers
thereunder cease, and the administrator shall forthwith

surrender the letters to the court. and render his account
within such time as the court directs. Proceedings for

the issuance of letters testamentary or of administration
under the will shall then commence. (S1 R82).
Note that it is only when the newly discovered
will has been admitted to probate that the letters of
administration shall be revoked by the probate court.
Q.

When may the probate court remove an executor/
administrator?

A.

The court may remove an executor or administrator if
he (PARIU);
a) Neglects to perform an order or judgment of the
court;
b) Absconds;
c) Neglects to render his account and settle the estate;
d) Becomes insane;
e) Becomes unsuitable to discharge the trust.

73

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

The court may in its discretion permit
executor/administrator to resign. (S2 R82).

the

Q.

May a contingent creditor have the personality to
seek the removal of an executor or administrator?

A.

Yes. While S2 R82 is silent as to who may seek the
executor or administrator's removal, it cannot be
doubted that a creditor, even a contingent one, would
have such personality. After all the interest of the
creditor in the estate relates to the preservation of sufficient
assets to answer for the debt, and the general
competence or good faith of the executor or administrator
is necessary to fulfill such promise. (Hilado v. Court
of Appeals, G.R. No. 164108, 8 May 2009)

Q.

Is the subsequent discovery that the duly appointed
administrator was Indebted to the decedent a
ground for his removal?

A.

No. The mere fact that the administrator was indebted
to the decedent Is not a ground for his removal.
absent any other circumstances indicating bad faith or
lack of integrity on his part. (Dalisay v. Consolacion,
L-44702, 30 July 1979)

Q.

An administratrix was later held to be without the
right to intervene in the settlement of the estate as
an heir, Is that a ground for her removal?

A.

No, since even a stranger can be appointed as an
administrator, (Parreno v. Aranzado, L-27657, 30
August 1982).

Q.

May a co-administrator be removed on the ground
of conflict with his co-administrator?

A.

No. The court should resolve the conflict to the best
interests of the estate. (Gonzalez v. Aguinaldo, 190
SCRA 112)
74

RULE 82
Revocation of Administration, Death, Resignation,
And Removal of Executors and Administrators

a.

ls the temporary residence outside the country,
maintained for the benefit of the health of the
administrator's family, a ground for his removal?

A.

No. (Id.).

Q.

An executor claimed as his own certain shares in
the deceased's name in a gas company on the
ground that the deceased was merely his dummy.
May the executor be properly removed?

A.

Yes. There is a conflict of interest between that of the
executor and that of the deceased since the executor
becomes unsuitable to discharge the trust. An
executor is a quasi-trustee who should be indifferent
between the interests of the claimants and the estate,
except to preserve the estate for due administration.
(Borromeo v. Borromeo, 97 Phil. 549).

Q.

What Is the effect of the revocation of the letters
testamentary, of the resignation or removal of the
executor or administrator upon his previous
lawful acts?

A,

The lawful acts of the executor or administrator before
the revocation of his letters testamentary or of
administration or before his resignation or removal
shall remain valid notwithstanding such revocation,
resignation, or removal. (S3 R82)

75

RULE 83. INVENTORY AND APPRAISAL;
PROVISION FOR SUPPORT OF FAMILY
0.

What are excluded from the inventory?

A,

The following are excluded from the inventory and as
such shall not be considered as assets nor
administered as such: (SBC)

1)

Clothes of the surviving spouse and the minor
children.

2)

Marriage bed and bedding.

3)

Provisions as will necessarily be consumed in the
subsistence of the family of the deceased under
the court's direction.

•

During the settlement of the estate, is there an
allowance for the deceased's family?

A.

Yes. The widow and minor or incapacitated children
of the deceased shall receive from the estate. under
the court's direction, such allowance as are provided
by law. (S3 R83). While this provision mentions only
the "widow," and the "minor" children, it should be
deemed to include the widower and the children even
of legal age as the right to support, especially the right
to education, subsists even beyond the age of
majority. (See Article 194, Family Code; 2 FLORENZ
D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 53
[9"rev ed.))

76

RULE 83

Inventory and Appraisal;
Provision for Support of Family

Q.

What is the basis of the allowance under S3 R837
May it be attached or levied on execution? May it
be the object of contracts?

A.

S3 R83 provides for the allowance granted to the
widow and family of the deceased person during the
settlement of the estate. This allowance is rooted on
the right and duty to support under the Civil Code.
The right to support is a purely personal right essential
to the life of the recipient, so that it cannot be subject
to attachment or execution. Neither can it be renounced
or transmitted to a third person. Being intransmissible,
support cannot be the object of contracts. Nonetheless,
it has also been held that support in arrears is a
different thing altogether. It may be compensated,
renounced and transmitted by onerous or gratuitous
title, (Siguion Reyna Montecillo Ongsliako v. ChiongloSia, 3 February 2016, Jardeleza, J.).

77

RULE 84. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES
OF EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
0.

Does an executor or administrator have the right
to the possession and management of the real as

well as the personal estate of the deceased?
A.

Yes, so long as it is necessary for the payment of the
debts and the expenses of administration, (S3 R84).
Hence the executor or administrator has all the powers
necessary for the administration of the estate and
which powers he can exercise without leave of court,

0.

May an executor or administrator enter Into a lease
contract over estate property without leave of court?

A.

Yes. the constitution of a lease contract over real or
personal property of the estate ls an act of
administration and thus leave of court ls not required.
This Is true even if the lease of real property would
exceed one year since the provisions of Article
1878(8) of the Civil Code on agency should not apply
to leases entered into by an executor or administrator
as they represent not only the estate but the heirs and
creditors as well. (San Diego v Nombre, 11 SCRA
165, 168-170 [1964]; see also 3 MANUEL MORAN,
COMMENTS ON THE RULES OF COURT 461-462
[1980 ed.))

78

RULE 85. ACCOUNTABILITY AND
COMPENSATION OF EXECUTORS
AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

May the executor/administrator profit by the increase
or lose by the decrease in value of the estate?

A.

No executor or administrator shall profit by the
increase, or suffer loss by the decrease or
destruction, without his fault, of any part of the estate.
He must account for the excess when he sells any
part of the estate for more than the appraisement, and
if any is sold for less than the appraisement, he is not
responsible for the loss, if the sale has been justly
mace. I e settles any claim against the estate for
less that its nominal value, he is entitled to charge in
his account only the amount he actually paid on the
settlement. (82 R85).

Q.

ls the executor/administrator liable for uncollected
debts?

A,

No. No executor/administrator shall be accountable
for debts due the deceased which remain uncollected

without his fault. (S3 R85).
Q.

What expenses and fees are allowed the executor
or administrator?

A.

An executor/administrator is allowed the necessary
expenses of administration and for his services a fee
of P4 a day or a commission upon the value of the
estate disposed of by him in the payment of debts,
expenses, legacies, or distributive shares. But where
the estate is large and the settlement has been attended
with great difficulty, and has required a high degree of

79

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

capacity on the part of the executor/administrator, a
greater sum may be allowed. (S7 R85). A compensation
of P500,000 was allowed where the administrator
succeeded in increasing the value of the estate from
P890,00 t0 P10,000,000. (Intestate Estate of Carmen
de Luna v. IAC, 170 S 246 [1989]).

a.

If the executor or administrator Is an attorney, can
he charge the estate professional fees for his
legal services?

A.

No. When the executor or administrator is an attorney,
he shall not charge against the estate any professional
fees for legal services rendered by him. (S7 R85),

Q.

Atty. Bermudo filed a petition for his appointment
as administrator of the estate of Artemio Hilario
and for the allowance and probate of the latter's
will before the RTC of Angeles City, The testator
instituted Roxas as his only heir but several
persons, who claimed to be Hilario's relatives,
opposed the petition. The RTC rendered a decision,
allowing the will and recognizing Roxas as Hilario's
sole heir. On appeal, the CA affirmed the RTC
decislon. The SC sustained the CA decision.
When the decision constituting Roxas as the
sole heir became final, Atty. Bermudo who also
served as counsel for her in the actions concerning
her inheritance filed a motion to fix his legal fees
and to constitute a charging lien against the estate
for the legal services he rendered. Roxas contends
that under S7 RB5 when the executor or administrator
is an attorney, he shall not charge against the
ostate any professional fees for legal services
rendered by him. Is Roxas' contention correct?

80

RULE 85
Accountability and Compensation

Of Executors and Administrators

A.

No. Atty. Bermudo did not only serve as administrator
of the estate. He also served as Roxas' counsel in
the suit that assailed her right as sole heir. Atty.
Bermudo brought the contest all the way up to this
Court to defend her rights to her uncle's estate, And
Atty Bermudo succeeded. Acting as counsel in that

suit for Roxas was not part of his duties as
administrator of the estate. Consequently, it was but
just that he is paid his attorney's fees. (Bermudo v.
Tayag-Roxas, 2 February 2011),
Q.

May a probate court order a bank to release the
proceeds of a foreign currency deposit without
the consent of the co-depositor?

A.

No since lit would violate Sec. 8 of the Foreign Currency

Deposit Act which states that a foreign currency
deposit is exempt from court process. (Pacioles v
Pacioles, 15 Oct 2018, Tijam, J.).

0.

Olivia was designated executrix in the will of the
deceased Adela. Olivia then engaged the services
of the Salonga Law Firm in connection with the
settlement of Adela's estate. The retainer provided
for the payment to the law firm of 3% of the gross
value of the estate as fees upon court approval of
the agreement for the distribution of the estate.
The law firm in behalf of the executrix filed a
petition for probate of Adela's will and settlement
of her estate, Adela's will was allowed probate.
Requests by the law firm upon Olivia for payment
of its fees went unheeded. Later the law firm filed
a motion for the Issuance of writ of execution
against the estate in respect of the 3% fee. While
notice of the motion was given Olivia, no notice
was given the other legatees and devlsees. Olivia
opposed the motion. The probate court denied the

81

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
motion on the ground that the law firm's claim for
payment of Its fees could only be directed against
the executrix in her personal capacity and that the
claim was premature since there was no courtapproved distribution agreement yet.

a)

May the law firm direct its claim against the
estate rather than the executrix?

b) Should the motion for issuance of writ of

execution be granted?
c) ls the motion premature?
A.
a)

Yes. The Supreme Court has held that the lawyer
should first seek payment from the executor or
administrator who is primarily liable. However if
the executor or administrator refuses to pay the
lawyer, the latter has two alternatives in collecting

fees for legal services rendered in settling an
estate. First the lawyer may file a separate suit
against the executor or administrator in the
latter's personal capacity. Second the lawyer may
file a direct claim against the estate itself for
recovery of the fees as administration expenses.
b)

No. When a lawyer files a direct claim against the
estate, there should be notice to all interested
persons so that they may have the opportunity to
challenge the propriety or the reasonableness of
the fees. In this case, the law firm did not give
notice of the motion to the legatees and devisees.

82

RULE 85
Accountability and Compensation
Of Executors and Administrators

c)

No the motion Is not premature. The nature of the
second recourse is not contractual unlike the first
which is based on the agreement between the

lawyer and the executor or administrator. The
second recourse is based rather on the fact that
the lawyer's fees are to be treated as administration

expenses and hence to be paid ahead of the
claims of the heirs, devisees, and legatees Hence
the same is not bound by the contingency required in
the retainer agreement. (Salonga Hernandez &
Al/ado v. Pascual, G.R. 127165, 2 May 2006.). In
that case while the SC said the motion for execution
may be denied outright, in order to avoid further
delay, the SC simply required the law firm to give
notice of the motion to all interested parties.

83

RULE 86. CLAIMS AGAINST THE ESTATE
0.

Discuss in brief the bifurcated approach of the
law to a money claim and a non-money claim
against the deceased.

A.

Under the Civil Code, rights and obligations of a
person which are not extinguished by his death are
transmitted to his heirs by operation of law or by will
(Art. 774 8 776, Civil Code). Obligations, whether money
or non-money debts, are transmitted to the heirs. An
important nuance is however laid down by our
procedural law with respect to monetary obligations
(money claims). Under Rules 88 to 90 of the Rules of
the Court, money debts are, properly speaking, not
transmitted to the heirs nor paid by them. The estate
pay them; it is only what is left after the debts are paid
that are transmitted to the heirs.
The distinction ls not only academic but has
practical implications. Thus if a decedent left no assets
or estate, his heirs are not obliged to pay his money
debts. On the other hand, even if the decedent left no
estate, the heirs are bound to deliver a car to the
vendee which the decedent had sold.
Different procedural rules apply to a money claim
as against a non-money claim, the main reason being
that money claims should be expeditiously resolved
so that the residue of the estate may be distributed to
the heirs. Thus money claims are subject to statute of
non-claims and the procedure for their enforcement is
summary in character, On the other hand since nonmoney claims are litigious in nature, for them to be
settled in the probate proceedings would naturally
embarrass and impede these proceedings and detract

84

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

from their summary character. Hence they are threshed
out in a separate action. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS).

O.

What are money clalms?

A.

The following are money claims: (CFSJ)

1) All claims for money against the decedent, arising
from contract, express or implied, whether the
same be due, not due, or contingent;
2) All claims for funeral expenses;
3) All claims for expenses for the last sickness of the

decedent; and
4)

Judgment for money against the decedent. (S5

R86).
0.

What are the money claims arising from contract,
express or implied, referred to in S5 R86?

A.

The Supreme Court has held that these refers to all
money claims arising out of contract, quasi-contract,
or law but do not refer to those arising from crime or
quasidelct. (Aguas v. Llemos, 5 SCRA 959). Claims

for money which are founded on tort or crime are not
money claims and should thus be filed against the
executor/administrator or against the heirs.
Q

Maclan incurred necessary expenses as a
possessor of a land owned by Mariano. Mariano
died and Garcia inherited the land. Maclan filed a

clvil case against Garcia to recover the necessary
expenses. Garcia filed a motion to dismiss on the
ground that the claim was barred by the statute of
non-claims, the probate proceedings for the settlement
of Mariano's estate having long been closed.

85

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Maclan opposed the motion contending that his
claim did not arise from a contract, express or
implied. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

Yes. The nght of a possessor to recover necessary
and usesfu improvements arises from a quasi-contract
under Article 2172, in relation to Article 54 of the
Civil Code. A quasi-contract is considered as an
implied contract within the purview of S5 R86. Hence
the claim for money grounded on a quasi-contract is
considered a contractual money under S5 R86. (Maclan
v. Garcia, 97 Phil. 119).

Q.

SHC filed with the Quezon City RTC a complaint
for delivery of lumber and/or damages against
AMC, SHC alleged that it delivered the crossed
Metro Bank checks payable to AMC through Chua,
AMC's general manager, but the lumber was
never delivered to it. In the meantime Chua died
and the proceeding for the settlement of his estate
was filed and was pending with the Pasay RTC.
In its answer, AMC alleged that it did not
know of the transaction and that Chua had deposited
the checks to his Metrobank account under the
name of Ayala Lumber, a sole proprietorship owned
by Chua, and encashed it. AMC filed a third-party
complaint against Metrobank for allowing the
deposit of the checks to Ayala Lumber, In its answer
to the third-party complaint, Metrobank alleged
that Chua represented to it that the arrangement
of depositing the checks to Ayala Lumber's account
was with AMC's consent and that AMC was
estopped from questioning such deposits.
Metrobank then filed a motion for leave to
admit fourth-party complaint against the estate of
Chua. In its fourth-party complaint, Metrobank
86

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

prayed that Chua's estate reimburse Metrobank in
case it would be held liable in the third-party
complaint filed against it by AMC. Should the RTC
grant leave to file the fourth-party complaint?

A.

No. The fourth-party complaint is in the nature of a
contractual money claim under S5 R86 which should
have been filed as a money claim in the probate
court of Pasay City. A quasi-contract is considered
as a contractual money claim (Maclan v. Garcia, 97
Phil. 119),
Here the action of Metrobank against the estate
of Chua is based on the quasi-contract of solutio
indebiti. Art. 2154 of the Civil Code provides that if
something is received when there is no right to demand
t and it was unduly delivered by mistake, the obligation
to return it arises. Metrobank acted in a manner akin
to a mistake when it deposited the AMC checks to
Ayala Lumber's account; because of Chua's control
over AMC's operations, Metrobank assumed that the
checks payable to AMC could be deposited to Ayala
Lumber's account.
Being a money claim, Metrobank's claim for relief
should have been filed in the probate proceedings
before the Pasay City RTC. Hence the QC RTC had
no authority to adjudicate the fourth-party complaint.

(Metrobank v.

Absolute

Management

Corp.,

9

January 2013)

Metrobank also argued that its claim for reimburserrent against the
estate of Chua should be a'lowed under S1 R6 which allows the filing fa
fourth-party co plaint for contribution, indemnification or any other reilet The
SC said that S5 R86, being the special law for money claims, prevails over the
general provisions of Sf R.

87

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

Are claims for unpaid taxes by the government
included in money claims?

A.

No. In fact they must be paid first before the estate is
distributed and where the estate is distributed without
the taxes being paid, the taxes may be enforced
against the distributees in proportion to their shares in
the inheritance. (Gov'tv. Pamintuan, 55 Phil. 13).

Q.

Romualdez sued Tiglao for unpaid rentals. Judgment
was rendered in favor of Romualdez. The judgment
was not satisfied notwithstanding the issuance of
a writ of execution. In the meantime Tiglao died
and probate proceedings for the settlement of her

estate took place. After the lapse of 5 years from
the entry of judgment but within 10 years
therefrom, Romualdez filed a civil case against
the administrator of Tiglao's estate for the revival
of the Judgment. The administrator filed a motion
to dismiss the action for revival invoking S1 R87
which states that no action upon a claim for
recovery of money shall be commenced against
the executor or administrator and that the remedy
of Romualdez was to present his claim in the
probate proceedings, Should the motion to dismiss
be granted?

A.

No. The original judgment has become stale because
of its non-execution after the lapse of 5 years. (S6
R39). Accordingly, it cannot be presented against the
estate of Tiglao unless it is first revived by action. This
is precisely why Romualdez has instituted the action
for revival whose object is not to make the estate of
Tiglao pay the sums of money adjudged in the first
judgment but merely to keep alive said judgment so
that the sums therein awarded can be presented as
claims against the estate in the probate proceedings.

88

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

(Romualdez v. Tigla0, 105 SCRA 72 [1981]). Note:
Romualdez should file a contingent claim with the
probate court within the Statute of Non-Claims in
order to preserve his rights over the judgment.
Q.

If a claim against the decedent is not among those
referred to in S5 RB6, whore should such a clalm
be filed?

A.

Such a claim should be filed in an action against the
executor or administrator or against the heirs. Hence
actions to recover real or personal property from the

estate, or to enforce a lien thereon, and actions to
recover damages for an injury to person or property
shall be brought against the executor or administrator.

(S1 R87).
0.

Where and within what time should a money claim
be filed?

A.

A money claim should be filed before the probate
court and within the time stated in the notice which the
probate court shall issue immediately after granting
letters testamentary or of administration. The notice
shall require all persons having money claims against

the decedent to file them in the office of the clerk of
said court. (S1 R86). Such time shall not be less
than 6 months nor more than 12 months after the date
of the first publication of the notice. This period is also
known as the statute of non-claims.

Q.

Should the notice be published and posted?

A.

Yes. Every executor or administrator shall, immediately
after the notice to creditors is issued, cause the same
to be published 3 weeks successively in a newspaper
of general circulation in the province, and to be
posted for the same period in 4 public places in the

province and in 2 public places in the municipality
where the decedent last resided. (S3 R86).
89

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

•

What is the effect if a money claim is not filed
within the statute of non-claims?

A.

They are barred forever,

Q.

P died while riding in the bus operated by D. D
subsequently died and a petition for the
settlement of his estate was filed in court. After
granting letters of administration, the probate
court issued a notice requiring all persons having
money claims against the decedent to file them in
court within 6 months from the first publication of
the notice. The 6-month period expired. Later the
heirs of P brought a suit against the administrator
of D's estate for damages arising from the death
of P. May the action be dismissed?

A.,

Yes, the action for damages against the heirs of D
may be dismissed.

Under the Rules on Special Proceedings, a
money claim arising from a contract should be filed
within the Statute of Non-Claims otherwise the same
shall be barred.
Here the action is a claim for money based on
the contract of carriage and was not filed within the
Statute of Non-Claims, which in this case was 6
months from the publication of the first notice. Even if
the action was filed after the settlement of the estate
of the deceased operator, the surt cannot be maintained
against his heirs, as the distributes of his estate, since
that may be done only if a contingent claim had been
filed in the probate proceedings in accordance with
S5 R88. Hence it is barred by the statute of nonclaims and thus the action may be dismissed. (De
Bautista v. De Guzman, 25 November 1983).

90

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

Q.

Are there exceptions to the rule that a money
claim not filed within the statute of non-claims is
barred forever?

A.

Yes, there are two exceptions. The first is in the case
of the so-called tardy claim. At any time before an
Qrder of distribution is entered, on application of a
creditor who has failed to file his claim within the
statute of non-claims, the court, may, for cause shown
and on such terms as are guitable, allow such claim
to be filed within a time not exceeding pne month from
the order of the court allowing the filing of such
particular claim. (S2 R86), Claimant must show good
cause for the delayed filing.

A tardy claim involves a two-step process. First
the claimant files a motion for leave to file a tardy
claim with the probate court at any time before an
order of distribution is entered, The motion must show
good cause for the delay in the filing. Second if the
motion for leave is granted, the claimant then files the
tardy claim within a period of one month from notice
of the order of the court granting leave to file the tardy
claim. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 63 [9 rev, ed., 3" printing)).
The second is when the administrator or executor
brings an action against the claimant. In such a case
the claimant may raise the money claim as a
counterclaim, even if beyond the statute of non-claims
and recover thereon if he is able to prove his claim
(S5 R86; 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 60 [6" rev. ed.])
Q.

ls the fact that the claimant was unaware of the
estate proceedings a good cause to allow filing of
a tardy claim?

91

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The law presumes that they had such knowledge

because the settlement of estate is a proceeding in
rem and therefore the failure to file their claims before

such proceedings barred them from subsequently
filing the same claims outside said proceedings. (See
De Bautista v De Guzman, 25 November 1983)
Q.

Is the fact that the claimant was negotiating with

one of the heirs for payment a good cause to
allow filing of a tardy claim?
A.

No. (Afan v. De Guzman, 107 Phil. 839 [1960])

Q.

The decedent in his wil! acknowledged a creditor's
claim and ordered its payment. Does this exempt
the creditor from the requirement of filing his
claim within the statute of non-claims?

A.

No. (Santos v. Manarang, 27 Phil. 209, Gotamco v.
Chan, 46 Phil. 542)

Q.

Give examples of a good cause for allowing the
filing of a tardy claim.

A.

Examples of a good cause for allowing the filing of a
lardy claim:

1)

Where a claim of P31,000 was not presented
because the administrator made it appear that the
value of the estate did not exceed P1,300. (In re
Estate of Reyes, 17 Phil, 188).

2) Fraudulent omission of certain assets in the
inventory. (Barredo v, CA, 6 SCRA 620).
3)

Where the judgment In favor of claimant was
rendered by the Court of Appeals on appeal after
the expiration of the statute of non-claims, claimant
arguing that she could not have filed a money

92

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

claim before since the trial court did not award
damages in her favor. (De Rama v. Palileo, 26
February 1965).
Q.

Pampanga Bus Co. (Pambusco) filed a complaint
for sum of money against D. During the pendency
of the case, D died. Intestate proceedings for the
settlement of D's estate commenced and notice to
the estate's creditors was given for them to file their
claim within 6 months from the first publication of
the notice. A month after the notice was given, on
Pambusco's motion, the administrator of D's estate
was substituted for O In the civil case for
collection. The court rendered judgment in favor of
Pambusco and D appealed. Pambusco filed a
contingent claim covering the judgment award
with the probate court. At the time of the filing of
the contingent claim, the 6-month period for creditors
to file their claim had expired. In due course the
judgment in favor of Pambusco was affirmed on
appeal and became final and thus Pambusco moved
that the estate be ordered to pay Pambusco. The
administrator opposed the motion on the ground
that the claim is time-barred since the contingent
claim was filed beyond the statute of non-claims.
ls the claim of Pambusco time-barred?

A.

No. Where the deceased was substituted by the
administrator in the civil action involving a money
claim, the estate is deemed to have notice of such
claim, The substitution of the deceased in the civil action
by the administrator or the decedent's representative
is generally considered as g_ulyalent to the presentation
of the claim with the_ probate court. Under the
circumstances, the filing of the contingent claim ad

abundantiorem cautelam was a mere formality
(Ignacio v. Pampanga Bus Co., G.R. No. L-18936, 23
May 1967).

93

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

a.

Cresencio sued Dioscoro for collection of a sum
of money, During the trial, but after the presentation of
plaintiff's evidence, Dioscoro died. Atty. Cruz,
Dioscoro's counsel then filed a motion to dismiss
the action on the ground of his client's death, The
court denied the motion to dismiss and, instead,
directed counsel to furnish the court with the
names and addresses of Dloscoro's heirs and

ordered that the designated administrator of
Dioscoro's estate be substituted as a representative
party, After trial, the court rendered judgment in
favor of Cresencio, When the decision became

final and executory, Cresenclo moved for the
issuance of a writ of execution against Dioscoro's
estate to enforce his judgment claim. The court
issued the writ of execution. Was the court's
issuance of the writ of execution proper? Explain,
(09 Bar Q7).

A.

The court's issuance of the writ of execution was not
proper.

Under Section 20 of Rule 3, a favorable judgment
in a contractual money claim shall be enforced in the
manner especially provided in the Rules for prosecuting
claims against the estate of a deceased person.
Under Rule 86 of the Rules of Court, a judgment for
money should be filed as a money claim with the
probate court The Supreme Court has held that a money
claim cannot be enforced by a writ of execution but
should instead be filed as a money claim.
Q.

A filed a complaint against Y with the RTC of
Argao, Cebu, for payment of a promissory note in
the sum of P350,000, for liquidated damages of
P10,000 and attorney's fees of P50,000. After he
filed his answer, Y died, but his lawyer did not file
a motion to dismiss. In the meantime, Y's widow
94

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

filed with the above court a special proceeding for
the settlement of the intestate estate of Y, The
widow, Z, was appointed the administratrix of the
estate. A filed in the civil case a motion to have Y
substituted by the administratrix; the latter did not
object. The court granted the motion. Trial on the
merits was had. In due course, the court rendered
a decision in favor of A. At the time it was
rendered, the period to file claims in the intestate
estate of Y had already lapsed. The administratrix,
X, did not appeal from the decision; and after it
became final, A moved for the execution of judgment.
Z opposed the motion contending that the
decision is vold because the claim does not survive.
The case should have been dismissed upon the
death of Y since upon his death, the court lost
jurisdiction over the case.

(a) Rule on the issue.
(b) If the opposition is without merit, can the writ
of execution be validly enforced?
(c) If it cannot be issued, what is the remedy of
A? (91 Bar Q10 ed).
A.

(a) The case should not be dismissed upon the death
of Y. Under the Rules of Civil Procedure, upon the
death of the defendant in a contractual money claim
before entry of final judgment, the case shall not be
dismissed but shall be allowed to continue until final
judgment, (S20 R3),
(b) The writ of execution cannot be validly enforced.

Under Section 20 of Rule 3, a favorable judgment
in a contractual money claim shall be enforced in the
manner especially provided in the Rules for
prosecuting claims against the estate of a deceased
person. Under Rule 86 of the Rules of Court, a
95

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
judgment for money should be filed as a money claim

with the probate court. The Supreme Court has held that
a money claim cannot be enforced by a writ of
execution but should Instead be filed as a money claim
(c) The remedy of A is to file the judgment for money

as a money claim with the probate court. The
substitution of the deceased in the civil action by
the administrator or the decedent's representative

is generally considered as equivalent to the
presentation of the claim with the probate court.
Hence the claim is not barred by the statute of
non-claims. (Ignacio v. Pampanga Bus Co., G.R.
No. L-18936, 23 May 1967).
Q.

In 1996 D borrowed P500,000 from P evidenced by
a promissory note which is payable on 5 March
2000. D died in 1998. In the proceedings for the
settlement of D's estate, the probate court issued
a notice for all creditors to file their claim within
12 months from the first publication of the notice.
The 12 .. month period subsequently expired. In
April 2000 P flied with the probate court a claim
based on the promissory note which had fallen
due. The administrator filed a motion to dismiss
on the ground that P's action had prescribed.
How should the probate court rule on the motion
to dismiss?

A.

The probate court should grant the motion to dismiss.
A contractual money claim, whether due or not,
or contingent, should be filed within the statute of nonclaims otherwise the same would be barred. (S5 R86).

Here the debt of D, even though not due, should
have been filed with the probate court within the
statute of non-claims.

96

RULE86
Claims Against the Estate

Q.

Husband and wife were solidarily indebted for a
sum of money to plaintiff. The husband died. The
plaintiff sued the wife to collect on the loan. The
trial court dismissed the complaint on the ground
that under S6 R86, "where the obligation of a
decedent ls solidary with another debtor, the claim
shall be filed against the decedent as if he were
the only debtor." Was the trial court's dismissal of
the suit proper?

A.

No. There is no compulsion for a creditor to file his
money claim with the probate court because he can
opt to go against the surviving solidary debtor in an
ordinary civil action. Article 1216 of the Civil Code
gives the creditor the right to "proceed against anyone
of the solidary debtors or some or all of them
simultaneously." S6 R86 cannot be made to prevail
over Article 1216 of the New Civil Code, the former
being merely procedural, while the latter is substantive.
(Boston Equity Resources v Toledo, 19 June 2013,
Perez, J.).

0.

In the proceedings for the settlement of the estate
of Alice, a contingent money claim for commission
in the event of the sale of properties of the estate
was filed by Alan with the probate court. The
executrix moved for the dismissal of the claim on
the ground that the docket fee under S7(a) R141
was not paid. The RTC dismissed the money
claim. Was the dismissal proper ?

A.

No. The trial court has jurisdiction to act on a money
claim even without payment of separate docket fees
because the probate court had already assumed
jurisdiction over the proceeding for settlement of the
estate of the deceased. Non-payment of the docket
fee for a money claim is not a ground for its dismissal.

97

PRIMER -REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The probate court should just order the payment of
the docket fees within a reasonable time, (Shekor v.
Estate of Sheker, G.R. No. 157912, 13 December 2007)
Q.

Same facts as the previous question, Thoe
executrix moved for the dismissal of the claim on
the ground that no certification against forum
shopping was attached thereto pursuant to S5 R7,
The RTC dismissed the money claim. Was the
dismissal proper?

A.

No. A certification against forum shopping is required
only for complaints and other initiatory pleadings. A
money claim against the estate is not an initiatory pleading
since the probate proceeding was already initiated
upon the filing of the petition for the allowance of the
decedent's will, A money claim does not initiate new
litigation but merely brings a material but incidental
matter arising in the progress of a case. Hence a
money claim is only incidental to the probate proceeding,
more so if it is contingent since the claimant cannot
even Institute a separate action for a mere contingent
claim. (Sheker v. Estate of Sheker, G.R. No. 157912,
13 December 2007).

Q,

M et al., as human rights victims obtained a
favorable judgment against the estate of Pres,
Marcos in the amount of $1.98. They filed a
complaint with RTC for the enforcement of such
judgment which has become final and executory.
The Marcos Estate filed a motion to dismiss for
non-payment of docket fees which it argued
should be based on the amount of tho judgment
award sought to be enforced. M et al. countered
that an action to enforce a foreign judgment Is
incapable of pecuniary estimation; hence the rate
of PhP 610 is sufficient. Should the docket fees be
computed based on the amount of the judgment
award sought to be enforced?

98

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

A.

No. S7(a) R141 relied upon by the RTC judge covers
only money claims against an estate not based on a
[udqment. Although the complaint may have been

lodged against an estate, the schedule of fees for
cases incapable of pecuniary estimation does not
apply in the case at bar, Nonetheless, for purposes of
classification under the governing procedural rule, this
foreign judgment may be subsumed under S7(b)(3)
R141, or class of actions not involving property.
(Mijares v. Ranada, G.R. No. 139325, 12 April 2005).
Q.

In case the mortgagor dies, what are the three
options available to the mortgagee-creditor?

A.

The three options available to the mortgagee-creditor
under S7 R86 are the following: (ARF)

1)

ABANDON. The mortgagee-creditor may abandon
the security and prosecute his credit as a money
claim under R86. This option does not make much
sense since the mortgagee-creditor will lose his
preferred lien and become a common creditor,
unless the mortgaged property has become worthless
or its value has depreciated considerably.

2) FORECLOSE. The mortgagee-creditor may foreclose
the mortgage. The suit should be filed against the
executor or administrator as party defendant.
This is not a money claim since it is a suit to
enforce a lien on personal or real property. (St
RB7). If there is a deficiency, the claim thereon
may be filed as a money claim with the probate
court within the statute of non-claims. Hence if
the mortgagee-creditor expects that there will be
a deficiency, he should file the deficiency claim as
a contingent claim. (2 Regalado 70).

99

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

3)

Q.

RELY. The mortgagee-creditor may rely solely
upon his mortgage and foreclose it within the
prescriptive period of 10 years from the accrual of
the right of action. (Art. 1142, Civil Code), The
mortgagee-creditor may decide not to foreclose
immediately but to just hold on to the mortgage.
If at the time the mortgagee-creditor decides to
foreclose, the administration proceedings are still
ongoing, it is the executor/administrator who
should be made the defendant, If there is already
an order of distribution, then the heir or the heirs
to whom the property is allocated shall be made
the defendant. (Ferandez v. Aninias, 57 Phil. 737).

X borrowed Pt million from a bank secured by a
real estate mortgage. X defaulted in the payment
of the loan so the bank filed a judicial foreclosure
suit against X. During the pendency of the case X
died and was substituted by his executor. In the
probate proceedings, the court issued a notice for
creditors to file their claim within 6 months from
the first publication of the notice. The bank did
not file any money claim in the probate court
within the 6-month period. Judgment in favor of
the bank was rendered in the foreclosure suit.

a) May the judgment on foreclosure be enforced?
b)

In due course the mortgaged property was
sold at the foreclosure sale but the proceeds
only amounted to P600,000. The bank filed a
motion for deficiency Judgment but this was
opposed by the executor who argued that a
deficiency judgment is already barred by the
statute of non-claims. ls the executor's contention
correct?

100

RULE 86
Claims Against the Estate

A.
a)

Yes the judgment on foreclosure may be enforced.

An action to enforce a lien on property is not a
money claim which is barre by the statute of
non-claims. (See S1 R87).

b)

Yes the executor's contention is correct. It has
been held that the possibility of recovering on a
deficiency judgment is a contingent claim which
should be filed within the statute of non-claims.
What the bank should have done was to file a
contingent claim for the probable deficiency with
the probate court within the 6-month period.

(PNB • CA, 360 SCRA 370)."

le there was substitution, the substitution was effected in the
foreclosure action, not in an action for collection, Compare with the case f
Ignacio v Pampanga Bus Co., supra.
101

RULE 87. ACTIONS BY AND AGAINST
EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS
Q.

What actions may be brought against the executor
or administrator?

A.
1) Actions to recover real or personal property from
the estate;
2)

Actions to enforce a lien on real or personal
property, and

3) Actions to recover damages for an injury to person
or property (RIL)
Q.

Who has the standing to sue for the recovery or
protection of the property or rights of the deceased?

A.

The executor or administrator. S2 RB7 provides that
for the recovery or protection of the property or rights

of the deceased, an executor or administrator may
bring or defend, in the right of the deceased, actions
for causes which survive.
0.

Pacita was the legitimate wife of Alonso who died
intestate in May 1995 but who left several real
properties located in 3 cities. Apart from Pacita
and her children (one of whom is Ed), the demise
of Alonso left in mourning his paramour Dora and
her 3 children. Subsequently Dora and her children
executed a deed of extrajudicial partition wherein
they obtained title over 3 parcels of land in Oagupan
City. When Ed learned of this, he lost no time in
instituting an intestate proceeding before the RTC
of Angeles City wherein Ed prayed that he be
appointed as the administrator. Three days later

102

RULE 87
Actions By and Against
Executors and Administrators

without waiting for his appointment, Ed and the
other heirs filed an action for annulment of the
extrajudiclal settlement before the RTC of Dagupan
City. In their answer, Dora and her children raised
the affirmative defense that Pacita and her
children are not the real-parties-in-interest but
rather the estate of Alonso in view of the pendency
of the administration proceedings. Dora and
her children asked that the action for annulment
be dismissed. Should the Judge dismiss the
annulment action?

A.

No, the judge should not dismiss the annulment
action. Even if administration proceedings have been
commenced, the heirs may still bring the suit if an
administrator has not yet been appointed. In such

cases the heirs cannot be expected to wait for the
appointment of an administrator and do nothing while

the rights and properties of the decedent are violated
or dissipated. (Rioferio v. CA, G.R. 129008, 13
January 2004)
Q.

What are the instances when the heirs may sue
for the recovery of estate property during the
pendency of probate proceedings? (ULP)

A.
1) If the executor/administrator is unwilling or refuses
to bring suit.
2)

When the executor/administrator is alleged to have

participated In the act complained of and he is
made a party-defendant.

3)

When letters testamentary or of administration
have not yet been issued. (/nto v. Valle, 9
December 2005).

103

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Where an executor or administrator is unwilling or
refuses to bring a suit for the recovery of the
property or rights of the deceased, what procedural
recourse may the heirs avail of?

A.

The heirs may bring the suit and implead the executor
or administrator as a co-defendant for being an
unwilling co-plaintiff, pursuant to S10 R3. (Borromeo
v. Borromeo, 98 Phil. 432; 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 76 [9" rev, ed.
3" printing)).

Q

Psued D and obtained a favorable decision which
has become final and executory. The sheriff sold,
at public auction, the rights and interest proindiviso of D over real properties, which are subject
of a special proceeding wherein D is one of the
heirs. P was the highest bidder in the auction
sale. D's co-heirs all then filed a complaint for the
declaration of nullity of the sale in P's favor
alleging that prior to the auction sale, 0 had
already waived her hereditary share in favor of her
co-heirs for valuable consideration. Can D's coheirs validly file the complaint where the estate is
already represented by an administratrix?

A.

Yes. In the case, it was alleged in the complaint that
D's co-heirs are the children and the surviving spouse
of the decedent whose estate is subject of the special
proceedings. They claimed that the sheriffs, without
having legal custody of the share or property of D,
sold the properties at public auction despite prior
verbal notice to them that the shares of D had already
been conveyed. It is clear therefore that the co-heirs
seek to protect their rights over the subject real
properties as heirs of the deceased. Their rights were
violated when the sheriffs sold the properties or

104

RULE 87
Actions By and Against
Executors and Administrators

interest therein. Hence, it is not the estate which they
represented when they filed their complaint but their
own. As such, they can, by themselves file the instant
complaint. (Into vs. Valle, 9 December 2005).
Q.

In the proceedings for the settlement of Dencio's
estate before the RTC, Ernie was appointed as
administrator. Harry filed a separate action for
damages against Ernie on the ground that Ernie
was not taking steps to prevent a riparian property
of the estate from being eroded by the river. Ernie
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that Harry
cannot file a separate actJon against him. Should
the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. When an executor or administrator is appointed
and assumes the trust, no action to recover the title or
possession of [ands or for damages done to such
shall be maintained against him by an heir or devisee
until there is a court order assigning such lands to
such heir or devisee or until the time allowed for
paying debts has expired. (S3 R87). The reason ls
that before distribution is made or before any residue
ls known, the heirs or devisees have no cause of
action against the executor or administrator for the
recovery of the property left by the deceased. (3
MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES
OF COURT 503 [1980 ed.)). Ernie may file a motion
with the probate court for the removal of Ernie on the
ground that he has become unsuitable to discharge
the trust.

Q.

D died and proceedings for the settlement of his
estate were commenced. The executor has it on
good information that X was holding a certificate
of title over D's property. Upon inquiry by the
executor, X feigns knowledge of the title. What is
the remedy of the executor?
105

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A,

The executor may file a motion or application to cite
X to appear before the probate court and be examined
under oath regarding the matter. If X refuses to
appear before it or to answer on examination or such
interrogatories as are put to him, the court may punish
him for contempt and may commit him to prison until
he submits to the order of the court.

•

If upon examination it is discovered that X is

indeed holding a certificate of title over D's
property, may the court order X to turn over the
certificate to the executor?
A.

No. An executor or administrator by mere motion in
the probate court cannot recover property claimed to
belong to the estate but in the possession of a third

party. The administrator has to bring an independent
action for this purpose against the third person because
he is not under the probate court's jurisdiction. The

third person may have defenses and this should be
threshed out in a full-blown hearing and not in the
summary proceeding of a probate case. (De la Cruz

v. Camon, 16 SCRA 886).
Q.

May the executor or administrator file an action to
recover property fraudulently conveyed by the
deceased in order to defraud his creditors?

A.

Yes if the estate is not sufficient to pay the debts and
expenses of administration. But he shall not be bound
to commence such action unless on application of the
creditors, nor unless the creditors making the application
pay such part of the costs and expenses, or give
security therefor to the executor or administrator, as
the court deems equitable. (S9 R87).

106

RULE 87

Actions By and Against
Executors and Administrators

0.

May a creditor himself file such action?

A.

Yes with the court's permission, if the executor or
administrator has not commenced such action and

provided the creditor has filed in court a bond,
executed to the executor or administrator, in an
amount approved by the judge, conditioned to indemnify

the executor or administrator against the costs and
expenses incurred by reason of such action. Where
the conveyance or attempted conveyance has been
made by the deceased in favor of the executor or
administrator, the action which the creditor may bring
shall be in the name of all the creditors, and court

permission and the filing of the bond are not
necessary. (S10 R87).

107

RULE 88. PAYMENT OF THE
DEBTS OF THE ESTATE
Q.

May the testator in his will designate the part of
the estate from which the debts shall be pald or
make provision for the payment of debts?

A.

Yes, but if the provision made by the will or the estate
appropriated is not sufficient, such part of the estate,
real or personal, as is not disposed of by will shall be
appropriated for that purpose. (S2 R88)

Q.

ls there an order in which estate property Is
charged for the payment of debts and expenses?

A.

Yes. First the part of the estate designated in the will
shall be charged for such payments. Second, the
personal estate of the deceased no disposed of by
will shall be chargeable with the payment of debts and
expenses. Third, f said personal estate is not sufficient
for that purpose, or its sale would be detrimental to
the participants of the estate, the whole of the real
estate not disposed of by will, or so much thereof as
is necessary, may be sold, mortgaged, or otherwise
encumbered for that purpose by the executor or
administrator, after obtaining the court's authority.
Any deficiency shall be met by contributions from
devisees, legatees, or heirs who have entered into
possession of portions of the estate before the
payment of debts and expenses. (S3 RB8),

Q.

What is the result if devisees, legatees, or heirs
enter into the possession of portions of the estate
before the debts and expenses have been settled
and paid?

108

RULE 88
Payment of the Debts of the Estate

A.

They become liable to contribute for the payment of
such debts and expenses. The probate court may
after hearing issue an order settling the amounts of
their liabilities and order how much and in what
manner each person shall contribute, and may issue
a writ of execution to satisfy the contributive shares.
(S6 R88).

•

How are contingent claims which become absolute

satisfied?
A.

If the contingent claim becomes absolute and is
presented to the probate court as an absolute claim
within 2 years from the time limited for other creditors
to present their claims, it will be paid in the same

manner as the other absolute claims, After said
period, the creditor may proceed against the distributees,
provided such contingent claims had been seasonably
filed in and allowed by the probate court.

The property reserved for the payment of

contingent claims may be retained by the executor or
administrator only within the 2-year period. Thereafter the
same shall be distributed by court order to the
persons entitled to the same. (S5 R88).

0.

What is the order of payment if the estate ls
insolvent?

A,

If the assets which can be appropriated for the
payment of the debts are not sufficient for that
purpose, the executor or administrator shall pay the
debts against the estate in accordance with the
provisions of Article 1059 and Articles 2239 t0 2251 of
the Civil Code on preference of credits, (S7 RB8),

109

RULE 89. SALES, MORTGAGES, AND
OTHER ENCUMBRANCES OF
PROPERTY OF DECEDENT
Q.

May the probate court authorize the executor or
administrator to sell the whole or a part of the real
or personal estate, although not necessary to pay
debts, legacies, or administration expenses?

A.

Yes, when it appears that such sale will be beneficial
to the heirs, devisees, legatees, and other interested
persons, the court may, upon, application of the
executor or administrator and on written notice to the
heirs, devisees, and legatees who are interested in
the estate to e soin, autnonze the executor or
administrator to sell the whole or a part of said estate.
But such authority shall not be granted if inconsistent
with the provisions of the will. (S4 R89)

a.

Seller executed a contract to sell over a parcel of
land in favor of the buyer. The seller died. The
buyer filed an action for specific performance
against the heirs of the sellers. The heirs argue
that the action for specific performance should be
filed against the estate of the seller because they
were not privies to the contracts entered into by
the seller and that whatever actions for the execution
of deeds of conveyance over real property which
the decedent contracted prior to his or her death
should be pursued in accordance with S8 R89, ls
the heirs' argument correct?

A.

No. The contracts bind the heirs pursuant to Article
1311 of the Civil Code which provides that contracts
taks effect between the parties and their heirs. S8
RB9 (when court may authorize conveyance of realty
which deceased contracted to convey) is applicable
110

RULE 69
Sales, Mortgages, and Other
Encumbrances of Property of Decedent

only when there is a pending probate proceeding,
Moreover, S8 R89 presupposes that thero is no
controversy as to the contract contemplated therein,

and if objections obtain, the remedy of the person
seeking the execution of the contract is an ordinary
and separate action to compel the same. (Heirs of
Villeza v. Aliangan, 2 December 2020, Caguioa, A.)
Although not tackled in the decision, nor would R86
be applicable since the action does not involve a
money claim, The action was properly filed against
the heirs pursuant to S1 R87

111

RULE 90. DISTRIBUTION AND
PARTITION OF THE ESTATE
Liquidation of community property or conjgal
u partnership
upon death of spouse
Q,

Explain liquidation of the community property or
conjugal partnership property.

A.

Liquidation is the process undertaken upon the dissolution
of the absolute community property or the conjugal
partnership of gains. Basically it involves taking an

inventory of the community property or conjugal
partnership property, paying the debts of the absolute
community or the conjugal partnership, delivering the
exclusive property of the spouses, and dividing the
net remainder equally between them. (Articles 102
and 129, Family Code)
Q.

How is the community property or conjugal
partnership property liquidated upon the dissolution
of marriage by death?

A.

When the marriage is dissolved by the death of the
husband or wife, the community property or the
conjugal partnership shall be liquidated in the same
proceedings for the settlement of the estate of the
deceased spouse. In this case, one half of the net
remainder shall pertain to the surviving spouse and
one half shall pertain to the estate of the deceased
spouse, to be distributed to the heirs, including the
surviving spouse after payment of debts and charges.
If both spouses have died, the liquidation may be
effected in the estate proceedings of either. (S2 R73;
Articles 103 and 130, Family Code).

112

RULE 90

Distribution And Partition of the Estate
If no judicial settlement proceeding is instituted,
the surviving spouse shall liquidate the community

property or conjugal partnership either judicially or
extrajudicially within one year from the death of the
deceased spouse. (Article 103 and 130, Family Code)
Such liquidation may be done judicially by an action
for partition under R69 or by extrajudicial settlement
under R74 provided there are no debts to be paid. If
there are debts, the surviving spouse has no choice
but to file a proceeding for the settlement of the estate
of the deceased spouse, in which case the liquidation
would be done in the same proceedings, (ALICIA V.
SEMPIO-DIY, HANDBOOK ON THE FAMILY CODE
OF THE PHILIPPINES 152 [1988)).

Partition and Distribution
Q.

When may the court issue an order of distribution?

A.

Only after the payment of debts, estate taxes,
administration expenses, funeral charges, and the
allowance to the widow have been paid. (S1 R90),

0.

S1 R90 speaks of allowance to the widow as one
of the items which should be paid before
distribution. How about allowance to the children?

A.

While S1 R9O speaks only of allowances to the
widow, It should also include the allowances to the
minor and incapacitated children of the deceased as
the payment of such allowances during the pendency
of the administrative proceedings is specifically authorized
by S3 R83. (2 REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 99-100 [9" rev. ed.])

113

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q,

What does the order of distribution provide?

A,

The order shall assign the residue of the estate to the
persons entitled to the same, naming them and the
proportions or parts to which each is entitled. (S1
R90). The order of distribution must also be at the
same time a declaration of heirs since a separate action
for the declaration of helrship is not proper. (Pimentel
• Palanca, S Phil. 436)

Q,

When is the issue of heirship to be determined?

A.

The issue of heirship is not to be determined until the
distribution stage of the proceedings. The exception
would be to determine entitlement or preference in the
appointment of the administrator in accordance with
the statutory order of preference. (Ngo The Hua v.
Chung Kiat Hua, 9 SCRA 113)

Q.

What is the right of the persons named as distributees
in the order of distribution?

A.

Such persons may demand and recover their respective
shares from the executor or administrator, Or
any other person having the same in his possession.
(S1 R90).

Q.

What if there ls a controversy before the court as
to who are the lawful heirs of the deceased
person or as to the distributive shares to which
each person is entitled under the law?

A.

The controversy shall be heard and decided as in
ordinary cases. (S1 R90).

a.

In the estate settlement proceedings, there was a
dispute as to whether Fe or Blandina was the
surviving spouse ot the decedent. Blandina submitted
copies of the foreign divorce decree between Fe
and the decedent to prove that Fe is not the
114

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition of the Estate

surviving spouse, The probate court, eschewing a
hearing, disregarded the foreign divorce decree
reasoning out that the same is not recognized in
the Philippines applying the case of Tenchavez v.

Escano which held that a foreign divorce obtained
by Filipino citizens is not entitled to recognition.
It then proceeded to declare Fe as the surviving

spouse. Did the probate court act propertly?
A.

No. The Supreme Court held that the action of the
probate court is a reversible error since the provision
of S1 R9O is clear that if there is a controversy as to

who are the lawful heirs, such controversy shall be
heard and decided as in ordinary cases.

Here Fe's citizenship at the time she obtained
the divorce decree was material for if she were an
American citizen, the foreign divorce would be valid
pursuant to Article 26 of the Family Code and she
would thus no longer be the surviving spouse, This
should have prompted the trial court to conduct a
hearing to establish Fe's citizenship, The purpose of
a hearing is to ascertain the truth of the matters in
issue with the aid of documentary and testimonial
evidence as well as the arguments of the parties
either supporting or opposing the evidence, Instead,
the lower court perfunctorily settled her claim in her
favor by merely applying the ruling in Tenchavez v.
Escado. This was in clear violation of S1 R90, (Quite
v. CA, 300 SCRA 406)
0.

in an action for reconveyance and annulment of
tltle, the trial court declared that the questioned
deed of sale can be regarded as an advance
Inheritance. Was Is proper for the trial court to

make such a declaration?

115

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

No. Questions as to advancement made, or alleged
to have been made, by the deceased to any heir
should be determined by the probate court having
jurisdiction over the estate proceedings. (S2 R90;
Natcher v. CA, 366 S 385 [2001]).

Q.

Respondent Lourdes Pacana filed an action for
recovery of a parcel of land against the Petitioners
who are the heirs of Teofilo Gabatan. Respondent
argues that she inherited the land from her
mother Hermogena who in turn inherited the same
from her father Juan Gabatan. However after the
death of Juan, his brother Teofilo took possession

of the land and after Teofilo's death, it was the
Petitioners who continued the possession. The
RTC ruled in favor of Respondent after making the
finding that Hermogena was the daughter of Juan.
Was it proper for the RTC to make the finding that
Hermogena was the daughter of Juan?
A.

No. Matters relating to the rights of filiation and
heirship must be ventilated in the proper probate court
in a special proceeding instituted precisely for the
purpose of determining such rights. They cannot be
adjudicated in an ordinary civil action, such as one for
recovery of property. The Court has consistently ruled
that the trial court cannot make a declaration of
heirship in the civil action for the reason that such a
declaration can only be made in a special proceeding.
(Gabatan v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 150206, 13
March 2009),

Q.

Petitioners filed a complaint for cancellation of
title and reconveyance of real property against
Respondent, Petitioners alleged that they are the
lawful heirs of Magdaleno Ypon (Magdaleno) who
died intestate and childless and that Respondent
had executed a fraudulent affidavit of self-adjudication
116

RULE 90

Distribution And Partition of the Estate

claiming to be the sole heir of Magdaleno and
thus was able to obtain title in his name over the
subject realty. Petitioners prayed that the affidavit
of self-adjudication and the certificate of title
issued in Respondent's name be nullified and that
the real property be reconveyed to them. Respondent
filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of failure
to state a cause of action. Should the motion to
dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. Petitioner's allegation that they are the lawful
heirs of Magdaleno is not enough to make them real
parties-in-interest since the determination of whether
they are lawful heirs can be made only in the

appropriate special proceeding and not in an ordinary
suit for cancellation of title and reconveyance. (Heirs
of Ypon v. Ricaforte, 8 July 2013, citing Gabatan v.
Court of Appeals, 581 SCRA 70 [2009]; Heirs of
Yaptinchay v. de! Rosario, 304 SCRA 18 [1999])
Hence the complaint may be dismissed for failure to
state a cause of action.
Q.

When may the need to institute a separate special

proceeding for the determination of heirship be
dispensed with?

A.

By way of exception, such a need may be dispensed
with for the sake of practicality, as when the parties in
the civil case had voluntarily submitted the issue to
the trial court and already presented their evidence
regarding the issue of heirship, and the RTC had
consequently rendered judgment thereon, or when a
special proceeding had been instituted but had been
finally closed and terminated, and hence, cannot be
re-opened. (Heirs of Ypon • Ricaforte, 8 July 2013)
In an action for recovery of ownership and possession
of land, the court could pass upon the issue of

117

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

heirship if the parties voluntarily submitted such issue
to the court. (/Heirs of Fabillar v. Peller, 21 January
2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Also, where the status of the plaintiff as heir is
indisputable or uncontroverted (as is usually the
situation in cases of a legitimate child or surviving
spouse), a prior declaration of heirship is not required.
(Heirs of Basbas v Basbas, 734 SCRA 625, 634
(2014]; Raymundo v Vda. De Suarez, 572 SCRA
384, 406-407 [2008]) Hence there was no need for a
prior declaration of heirship before a daughter may
commence an action arising from any right of her
predecessor, such as one for annulment of mortgage.
(Gloria v. Builders Savings & Loan Assoc., 4 June 2018,
Del Castillo, J.)
Q.

Donata Lardizabal is the original owner of a parcel
of registered land. Her heirs sold the land to
plaintiffs. Plaintiffs sued defendants for annulment
of title. In their complaint, the Plaintiffs allege that
they are Innocent purchasers for value of the land.
Dofendants contend that the status of the heirs of
Donata must first be established in a speclal
proceeding, Is the Defendants' contention correct?

A.

No. There Is no prior requirement that the status of
the heirs of Donata be first established in a special
proceeding if plaintiffs base their right of action not on
the fact of their seller's heirship to Donata but on their

own rights as innocent purchasers for value. (Limos
v Odones, 11 August 2010)
Q.

Norberto Bas bought a land. Norberto died
without a will and his property was inherited by
his niece and sole heir Lolita Bas Capablanca.
Later Lolita learned that a reconstituted title over
the land was obtained by the heirs of Pedro Bas.
118

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition of the Estate

Lolita sued the heirs of Pedro Bas for cancellation
of the title. The heirs filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that there must be a prior declaration
of heirship of Lolita to Norberto. Should the
motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

No. There is no need for separate declaration of
heirship where plaintiff's right is primarily based on the
sale of the land to her predecessor, not succession.
Plaintiff's claim is anchored on a sale of the property

to her predecessor-in-interest and not on any filiation
with the original owner, What plaintiff is pursuing is
Norberto's right of ownership over the property which
was passed to her upon the latter's death. The Court

has stated that no judicial declaration of heirship is
necessary in order that an heir may assert his or her
right to the property of the deceased. Moreover,
plaintiff's status as heir of Norberto was undisputed.
(Capablancs v. Bas, 28 June 2017, Leonen, J.)
Q.

Margarita died and probate proceedings for the
allowance of her will were instituted. In her will,
Margarita left all her property to her two children,
Vicente and Benito. During the pendency of probate
case, Juana instituted an ordinary action alleging
that the two children of Margarita were illegitimate
and that she was the sole heir, The prayer of her
complaint was that she be declared the lawful heir
and entitled to all the property of Margarita. May
the trial court in the second case pass upon the
issue of the heirship to the estate of Margarita?

A.

No. Where there is a pending probate proceeding, a
separate action for the declaration of heirs is not
proper. It is the probate court which has the power to
determine the issue of heirship, (Pimentel v. Palanca,
G.R. N. L-2108, 18 December 1905)

119

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

A woman died leaving her husband (petitioner)
and her seven siblings (private respondents) as
her sole heirs. The petitioner then executed affidavits
of self-adjudication under R74 averring that he
was the sole heir and causing the registration of
his wife's real property under his sole name. The
private respondents thus filed with the RTC an
action for annulment of the affidavits and for
reconveyance of the real property against the
petitioner. In this action, the private respondents
attached photocopies of their birth certificates
showing that they are the siblings of the decedent.

The petitioner filed an unsworn answer which
raised the affirmative defense of failure of the
complaint to state a cause of action. The petitioner
argued that since there was no preliminary
determination of the private respondent's status
as heirs in the appropriate special proceeding for
the settlement of the deceased's estate, the
private respondents cannot be said to be the real
parties-in-interest. How should the court rule on
the affirmative defense?
A.

The court should deny the affirmative defense of
failure to state a cause of action.
Unless there is a pending special proceeding for
the settlement of the decedent's estate or for the
determination of heirship, the compulsory or intestate
heirs may commence an ordinary civil action to declare
the nullity of a deed or instrument, and for recovery of
property, or any other action in the enforcement of
their ownership nights acquired by virtue of succession,
without the necessity of a prior and separate judicial
declaration of their status as such. The rationale is that
pursuant to Article 777 of the Civil Code, the rights to

120

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition of the Estate

the inheritance are transmitted to the heirs from the

moment of the decedent's death. Hence the affirmative
defense of failure to state a cause of action will no
longer lie. [Treyes v. Larlar, e.b., G.R. No. 232579, 8
September 2020; overturning Heirs of Ypon v. Riaforte,
c
8 July 2013, Heirs of Yaptinchay v. dol Rosario, 304
SCRA 18 (1999) etc.]
Q.

The

late Anastacia

Abangan

and

Raymundo

Cabellon were allegedly married in February 1873.

A delayed registration of the marriage was entered
in the records of the civil registrar and a certificate
of marriage issued sometime in September 2007 or
134 years after their purported matrimonial bond.
The petition for late registration was filed by
respondents who were allegedly the true legal
heirs and descendants of Anastacia and Raymundo.
On 19 May 2008, the United Abangan Clan
filed a Petition seeking the cancellation of the
entry in the Register of Marriages. On the other
hand, respondents argued that petitioner was
engaged in forum shopping, since the fact of
marriage between Anastacia and Raymundo was
an important issue to be resolved In another case.
Docketed as Sp. Proc. No. 16171-CEB, the case
involved a petition for the judicial declaration of
the helrs of decedent Anastacia (first petition)
filed also by the petitioner.
The RTC dismissed the petition for cancellation
of the entry in the register of marriages (second
potition) on the ground of litis pendentia.
According to the trial court, the first petition (SP.
PRO. NO. 16171-CEB) and the second petition
(SP. PROC. No. 16180.-CEB), which were both
initiated by petitioner, involved the same parties

121

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

and concerned the same issues and reliefs prayed
for. Did the trial court correctly dismiss the
petition for cancellation of entry on the ground of
lis pendens?

A.

No. There is no identity and similarity between the
first and the second petitions with respect to the
issues under litigation. The action in the first petition
inwolves a judicial declaration of heirship, while the
main issue in the second petition pertains to a
cancellation of entry in the civil register. In the former,
what is established is a party's rigtt of succession to
the decedent; in the latter, among those settled are
the issues of nationality, paternity, filiation, legitimacy

of the marital status, and registrability of an event
affecrng the status or nationality of an individual.
Because the respective subject matters in the two
actions differ, any decision that may be rendered in
one of them cannot constitute res judicata in the other. A
judicial declaration of heirship is inconclusive on the
fact of occurrence of an event registered or to be
registered in the civil register, while changes in the
entries in the civil register do not In themselves settle
the issue of succession, (United Abangan Clan Inc. v.
Sabellano- Sumagang, G.R. No, 186722, 18 June 2012).
Q.

ls there such a proceeding as an action for
declaration of heirship?

A.

Yes. An action for declaration of heirship (declaracion
de herederos) refers to a special proceeding in which
a person claiming the status of heir seeks prior
judicial declaration of his or her right to inherit from a
decedent. (Id.)

the

gsnoe this is a special proceeding.
more precise tomm is 'proceeding
for declaration of heirstip rather than "action tor doclaration at heirship

122

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition

o the Estate

a.

Explain a project of partition.

A.

The heirs may by agreement submit a project of
partition to serve as the basis of the order of
distribution. The heirs who do not agree thereto may
submit a counter-project of partition. If approved by
the court, the same will serve as the basis of the order
of distribution, The court order approving the project
may at the same time serve as the order of distribution.
(2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 100 [9 rev. ed., 3"° printing]).

Q,

When and how do you appeal from an order of
distribution?

A.

An order of distribution is appealable within 30 days
from notice by filing both a notice of appeal and a

record on appeal with the probate court. This is because
the order of distribution involves multiple or separate
appeals, The probate court still needs to hold on to
the original records since motions to file leave for
tardy claims may still be filed at any time before the
entry of the order of distribution. (See S2 R86).
Q.

A project of partition was filed wIth the probate
court dividing the estate between the surviving
spouse and the adopted daughter in the proportion
of 5/8 and 3/8, respectively, The court issued an
order approving the project of partition which was
received by the surviving spouse and the adopted
daughter. More than two months later, the surviving
spouse filed a motion for correction of the project
of partition claiming that the partition was
erroneous since under jurisprudence, the share in
case of intestacy of the surviving spouse concurring
with only one legitimate child is % of the estate
and thus he should have gotten %(% + %,) of the
property partitioned. Should the motion for correction
of the project of partition be granted?
123

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. Since the order approving the project of partition
had already become final, the probate court may no
longer amend the same. (/mperial v. Munoz, 58
SCRA 678 [1974)

Q.

If the order of distribution affects registered land,
should the same be registered?

A.

Yes, once the same becomes final, Proof of payment
or exemption from estate tax shall be presented to the
register of deeds as a requirement for registration.

Upon the presentation of the owner's duplicate
certificate of title, new certificates of title shall be
issued to the parties entitled thereto in accordance
with the approved partition and distribution. (Sec. 92,
P.D. No. 1529)
Q.

May a probate court issue writs of execution?

A,

The general rule is that a probate court cannot issue
writs of execution because its orders as a rule refer to
the adjudication of claims against the estate which the
executor or administrator may satisfy without the need
of executory process. There are however four
instances wherein a probate court may issue a writ of
execution. (PECS)
1)

CONTRIBUTIVE SHARES. Where devisees,
legatees, or heirs have entered into possession of
portions of the estate before the debts and
expenses have been settled and paid, and have
become liable to contribute for the payments of
such debts and expenses, the probate court may
issue writs of execution to satisfy the contributive
shares of such devisees, legatees, or helrs. (S6
RB8), Where the heirs had already received their
shares in the estate, the probate court may issue

124

RULE 90
Distribution And Partition of the Estate

a writ of execution to compel them to pay their
respective shares to satisfy unpaid debts of the
estate. (/gnacio • Eichico, G.R. No. L-18937, 16
May 1967)
2)

EXAMINATION COSTS. To satisfy the costs
when a person is cited for examination in probate
proceedings. (S13 R142)

3)

PARTITION EXPENSES. To satisfy the expenses
of partition which the parties may become liable
in proportion to their respective shares and
interest. (S3 R90). (2 REGALADO 12)

4)

SURETY'S LIABILITY ON BONDS. To enforce
liability of sureties under bonds filed with the
probate court. (Cosme de Mendoza v. Pacheco,
64 Phil. 134).

Closure
Q.

When is the order of closure issued by the
probate court?

A.

After the payment of all debts and the delivery of the
estate to the heirs. This Is because the probate court
loses jurisdiction of an estate under administration
only after such payment and delivery. The finality of
the order of distribution or of the approval of the
project of partition does not yet terminate the
proceedings. (Siguion v. Tecson, 89 Phil, 28)

Q.

May the order of closure be appealed? If so within
what period and how shall the appeal be taken?

A.

The order of closure may be appealed since it is a
final order which affects the substantial rights of the
person appealing, (S1[f] R109). The appeal shall be
taken within 15 days by filing a notice of appeal. A

125

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

record on appeal is not required since it does not
involve a multiple or separate appeals as there Is
nothing more left to be done by the probate court
Q.

What is the remedy of an heir entitled to the
residue of the estate but not given his share?

A.

Where an heir who has been duly notified of the
proceedings is not included or not given any share in
the order of distribution, he must move for reconsideration

or appeal therefrom within 30 days from notice,
otherwise the order becomes final.
Wnere the heir and his address is known to the
petitioner, but no notice was given to him, the heir can
file an action to annul the judgment. The failure to
notify him deprives the probate court of jurisdiction 'o
render a valid judgment.
Where the heir or his address is unknown and no
personal notice was given to him, he can file a motion
with the probate court for the delivery of his share or
to re-open the proceedings if the order of closure is
not yet final. If the order of closure has become final,
the remedy of the heir is to file an action for
reconveyance against the distributees."
Where the heir is given a share in the order of
distribution, he may move for the delivery of the same
to him, even after the closure of the proceedings,
subject to acquisitive prescription in favor of adverse
possessors. The provisions of S6 R39 do not apply to
special proceedings. (Rodit v. Benedicto, 95 SCRA

137 (1980))

this case, e prior declaration of heship ls not required since the
probate proceedings had been dosed and terminated. (See Heirs of Ypon v.
Ricaforte, B July 2013)

126

OTHER SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
RULE 91. ESCHEATS
Q.

What is escheat?

A.

It is the special proceeding instituted by the Solicitor
General or his representative in behalf of the Republic

to obtain title over the personal or real estate of a
person who dies intestate leaving no heir or person
entitled to the same. (S1 R91)

Q

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction over
escheat proceedings?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Act
of 1948, which provides that the Court of First
Instance (now RTC) shall have original and exclusive

jurisdiction over special proceedings not otherwise
provided for by law. This provision was not repealed
by B.P. Big. 129.
Q.

May the estate of the decedent be escheated even

if he died testate?
A.

No, since the probate of a will is mandatory. However
if the will is disallowed by a probate court and such

order has become final, It is as If the decedent died
intestate and hls estate may be escheated if he has
no heir or person entitled to the estate.
Q.

In an intestate estate proceeding, the probate
court found that the decedent left no heirs or
persons entitled to his estate. Could the probate
court then and there decree that the estate be
awarded to the State?

127

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The proper escheat proceedings must be brought
in which the requirements under R91 (like publication
once a week for 6 consecutive weeks) should be
complied with. (De Guzman v, Sevilla, 47 Phil. 891
[19741).

Q.

Outline in brief the procedure in an escheat
proceeding.

A.
1)

When a person dies intestate leaving real or
personal estate but with no heir or person entitled
to the same, the Solicitor General or his
representative in behalf of the Republic may file a
petition with the RTC of the place where the
deceased last resided or in which he had estate,
if the deceased is a non-resident.

2) The court shall fix a date and place for the hearing
which shall not be more than 6 months from the
entry of the order and shall direct that a copy of
the order be published at least once a week for 6
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation.

3)

The court shall adjudge that the estate of the
deceased in the Philippines, after the payment of
debts and charges, shall be escheated.

Q.

In an escheat proceeding, an opposition was filed
by the decedent's heirs. May the court convert the
escheat proceedings to a probate proceeding and
distribute the estate to the oppositors-heirs?

A.

No, The proceedings were instituted as escheat
proceedings and not for the settlement of the estate of
deceased persons. The court acquired jurisdiction to
hear the petition for escheat by virtue of the publication
of the petition for escheat. The jurisdiction acquired

128

RULE 91
Escheats

can not be converted into one for the distribution of

the properties of the said decedents. For such
proceedings to be instituted, the proper parties must
be presented and the proceedings should comply with
the requirements of the Rules. Hence, the escheat
court does not have the power to distribute of the
estate of the decedent and adjudicate the properties
to the oppositors. (/Negros Occidental Municipalities of
Magallon, Isabela and La Castellana v. Bezore, 109

Phil. 829 [1960])
Q.

May an heir or person entitled to the estate
recover the same after its escheat?

A.

Yes, provided the claim is filed within 5 years from the
date of the Judgment." In such a case the claimant
shall have title to and possession of the property. If
the property had been sold, the city or municipality
shall be accountable to the claimant for the proceeds,
after deducting reasonable charges for the care of the
estate. A claim not made within the 5-year peniod
shall be forever barred.

0.

What is an action for reversion?

A.

An action brought by the Republic to recover
properties alienated in violation of the Constitution or
of any statute. (S5 R91). Lands of the public domain
and real rights thereto which were acquired in
violation of the Constitution or the public land laws
shall also be reverted to the State. (Sec. 21, Article
XVIII, Constitution).

gtile 1014 of the Civil Code reckons the S-year period "from the date

the property was delivered to the State." It is opine that if ts the Civit Code
provision which prevails since prescription is a matter of substantive not
procedural law. A suggestion to the bar examinee is to cte S4 9t if the
question is in Remedial Law and Article 1014 i the question ls in Civil Law

129

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction over
actions for reversion?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Act
of 1948, which provides that tho Court of First
Instance (now RTC) shall have original and exclusive
jurisdiction over special proceedings not otherwise
provided for by law. An action for reversion is an action
for escheat, which is a special proceeding, (S5 R91)

0.

The Republic filed with the RTC of Paranaque City
an action for reversion against Yujuico involving a
land in Paranaque with an assessed value of more
than P50,000. The Republic contended that the
judgment of the CFI of Pasig, acting as a land
registration court, which decreed the issuance of

an OCT over the land is a nullity since the land
was under water and thus part of the Manila Bay.
Does the RTC have jurisdiction over the action
for reversion?
A.

No. Under B.P. Blg. 129, the Court of Appeals has
exclusive original junisdiction over actions for the
annulment of judgments of the RTC.
Here the action at bottom seeks to nullify the
judgment of the CFI, acting as a land registration
court, on the ground that a land registration court
cannot issue a title over property of the public domain.
Hence it is the Court of Appeals which has original
exclusive jurisdiction pursuant to Sec, 9(2) of B.P.
8lg. 129. (Yujuico v. Republic, G.R. No 168861, 26
October 2007).

0.

The Republic filed with the RTC of Tanauan,
Batangas, an action for reversion and cancellation
of title against Malabanan (Civil Case No, C-192)
The Republic alleged that Malabanan's TCT No. T24268 had emanated from Original Certificate of

130

RULE 91
Escheats

Title (OCT) No. 0-17421 of the Registry of Deeds of
Batangas, which was purportedly issued pursuant
to Decree No. 589383 in L.R.A. Record No. 50573;
that upon verification, the Land Registration Authority

could not find any copy of the judgment rendered
in LRC Record No. 50573; and that the tract of
land covered by TCT No. T-24268, being within the

unclassified public forest, remained part of the
public domain that pertained to the State and could
not be the subject of disposition or registration.

Malabanan moved to dismiss Civil Case No.

C-192, arguing that the RTC had no jurisdiction
over the action because it sought the annulment
of the judgment and the decree issued in LRC

Record No, 50573 by the Court of First Instance,
and thus an action for annulment of judgment
under R47, the jurisdiction over which pertained
to the Court of Appeals pursuant to Yu/uico v.
Republic. Should the motion to dismiss be granted?
A.

No. The jurisdiction over an action for reversion is
with the RTC. The RTC may properly take cognizance
of reversion suits which do not call for an annulment
of judgment of the RTC acting as a Land Registration
Court."
Yujuico is not apropos since here the Republic is
not seeking seeking the annulment of the judgment
from which Decree No. 589383 was derived inasmuch
as such judgment did not exist in the first place
(Malabanan v. Republic, 19 September 2018, PerlasBernabe, J.).

"re decision cited Section 192) of B.P Elg 129 as the bass of the
RTC'gs jurisdiction where the assessed value pf tine real property exceeded
P20,00O It is submitted tnat the more precise basis of the mTC's jurisdiction Is
Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Reorganization Aet f 1948 and thus the RTC would
have jurisdiction over actions tor reversion regardless of the assessed va'ue cf
the property

131

RULE 92. GUARDIANSHIP (VENUE)
Q.

What are the three kinds of guardians under
the law?

A.

There are three kinds of guardians under the law:
1) The legal guardian. One who is such by provision
of law without the need of a court appointment.
The father and mother shall jointly exercise legal
guardianship over the person and the property of
their unemancipated common child without the
need of a court appointment. (S1 Rule on
Guardianship of Minors).

2) The guardian ad litem. One who is appointed by
the count for purposes of a particular action or
proceeding involving a minor.

3)

The general guardian. One who is appointed by
the court over the person and/or property of the
ward to represent the latter in all his civil acts and
transactions.

0Q.

Who may be put under guardianship and what
does the guardianship cover?

A.

Two kinds of persons may be put under guardianship:
minors and incompetents. The guardianship may be
over their (a) persons, (b) property, or (c) both persons
and property. If the minor or ward is a non-resident,

the guardianship may be with respect only to the
minor's or ward's property. (See S6 R93, S3 RGM).
Q.

What rules govern guardianship?

A.

Rule on guardianship of minors now governed by the
SC Rule on Guardianship of Minors (RGM) effective 1
May 2001. Rules 92 to 97 are still applicable to
guardianship over incompetents.
132

RULE 92
Guardianship (Venue)

Q.

Who are incompetents for purposes of the rules
on guardianship?

A.

Incompetent includes persons suffering civil interdiction,
hospitalized lepers, prodigals, deaf and dumb who are

unable to read and write, and those who are of
unsound mind (even though with lucid intervals). Also
persons not being of unsound mind but by reason of
weak mind, age, disease, or other similar causes
(WADO) cannot, without outside aid, take care of

themselves and manage their property, becoming
thereby an easy prey for deceit and exploitation.

(S2 R92)
Q.

What is the jurisdiction
guardianship proceeding?

and

venue

of

a

A.

Guardianship over incompetents: RTC of the place
where the incompetent resides. If a non-resident, with
the RTC of the place where the incompetent's property
or part thereof is situated.
Guardianship over minors. Family Court of the
place where the minor resides. If a non-resident, with
the Family Court of the place where the minor's
property or part thereof is situated. (S3 RGM).
Take note that MTCs no longer have jurisdiction
over guardianship proceedings pursuant to B.P. BIg.
129. However where the minor or incompetent ls a
party to an action in the MTC, the latter may appoint a
guardian ad litem for him.

133

RULE 93. APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIANS
Q.

Who may petition for the appointment of a guardian
over an incompetent or a minor?

A.

Any relative, friend, or other person on behalf of an
incompetent who has no parent or lawful guardian.
(S1 R93)
In the case of a minor
1) Any relative or other person on behalf of a minor,

2) The minor himself, if fourteen years of age or above.
3 Secretary of Social Welfare and Develop ment and

by the Secretary of Health in the case of an insane
minor who needs to be hospitalized. (S2 RGM)
When the minor resides outside the Philippines

but has property in the Philippines, any relative or
friend of such minor, or any one interested in his
property, in expectancy or otherwise, may petition for
the appointment of a guardian over the property.
(S12 RGM)
Q.

Should the petition be verified?

A.

Yes. (S2 R93)

Q.

What are the grounds for the appointment of a
guardian of a minor?

A.

The grounds for the appointment of a guardian over
the person or property, or both, of a minor are the

following: (BRP3)
(a) Death, continued absence, or incapacity of his
• arents,

134

RULE 93
Appointment of Guardians

(b) Suspension, deprivation or termination of parental

authority
(c) Remarria je of his surviving parent, if the latter is

found unsuitable to exercise parental authority.
(d) When the best interests of the minor so requires.
(S4 RGM).
Q.

A,

ls the remarriage of a surviving parent, by itself, a
ground for the appointment of a guardian over the
person or property of the minor children?
No. The reason is that the surviving parent's parental

authority is not lost unless there ls a finding that he or
she is unsuitable to exercise parental authority. In
such a case the court shall appoint another person to
be the guardian of the person or property of the minor
children. (S4[c] RGM in relation to Article 212 of the
Family Code)
Q.

What about remarriage of the parent in case of
nullification or annulment of the prior marriage?
Would that be a ground for the appointment
of a guardian over the person or property of the
minor child?

A.

A reading of S4 RGM would indicate that the parent's
remarriage after the annulment or nullification of his or
her prior marriage is by itself not a ground for the
appointment of a guardian since S4 speaks only of
remarriage of a surviving parent. However the appointment
of a guardian may still be sought under the "best
interests of the minor" ground."

"aan Melenio Ste. Maria believes that the remarried parent should
apply for legal guardianship over the minor child s property in line with the last
paragraph of Artice 225 of te Fmiy Code. MELENCIO ST MARIA. COURRT
PQCEDI!5S IN FAM YLWC'S-515257 1' ei.

zoo+

135

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Who may be
Incompetent?

A.

In the appointment of a guardian for an incompetent,
the choice of a suitable guardian is left to the sound
discretion of the guardianship court. (Goyena v. Gustilo,
G.R. NO. 147148, 13 January 2003). A non-resident
should not be appointed as a guardian because it
would be difficult for him to fulfill his duties. (Vansil v.
Balmes, 358 SCRA 707 [2001]).

appointed

a

guardian

of

an

There is no rule of preference regarding the
appointment of a guardian over an incompetent.
Compare with the rule on the appointment of a guardian

over a minor under S6 RGM.
Q.

A.

Who may be appointed guardian of the person or
property, or both, of a minor?

In default of parents or a court-appointed guardian,

the court may appoint a guardian of the person or
property, or both, of a minor, observing as tar as
practicable, the following order of preference: (GB CO)

a)

The surviving grandparent and in case several
grandparents survive, the court shall select any of
them taking into account all relevant considerations.

b) The oldest brother or sister of the minor over 21,
unless fit or disqualified.
c) The actual custodian of the minor over 21, unless

unfit or disqualified; and
d) Any other person, who In the sound discretion of
the court, would serve the best interests of the minor.

136

RULE 93
Appointment of Guardians

0.

What should the verified petition contain?

A.

The verified petition should contain the following:
1) Jurisdictional facts.
2) The incompetency.

3) Names, ages, and residences of the incompetent's
relatives and the persons having him in their care.
4) Probable value and character of the incompetent's

estate.

5) The person for whom letters of guardianship are
prayed for (S2 R93).
A petition for the appointment of a general

guardian of a minor must allege the following:
a) The jurisdictional facts.

b) The name, age and residence of the prospective
ward.
c) The ground rendering the appointment necessary or

convenient.
d) The death of the minor's parents or the termination,
deprivation or suspension of their parental authority.
e) The remarriage of the minor's surviving parent.

f) The names, ages, and residences of relatives
within the 4" civil degree of the minor, and of
persons having him in their care and custody.
g) The probable value, character and location of the
property of the minor;

h) The name, age and residence of the person for
whom letters of guardianship are prayed. (S7 RGM)
137

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Will any defect in the petition or verification render
void the issuance of letters of guardianship?

A.

No. (S2 R93, S7 RGM)

Q.

After the petition for the appointment of a general
guardian is filed, what shall the court do next?

A.

The court shall fix a time and place for hearing the
same. Reasonable notice of the hearing of the petition
shall be given to the persons mentioned in the petition
including the incompetent himself. The court may
direct other general or special notice to be given. (S3
R93). Where the person liable to be put under
guardianship resides abroad but has estate in the
Philippines, the court may direct that notice be given
by publication or otherwise. (S6 R93).
The rule is substantially the same with respect to
guardianship over minor with the special requirement
that notice of the hearing shall be given the minor if
14 years of age or over, (S8 RGM),

Q.

A.

ls acase study report required?
No case study report is required in proceedings for
guardianship of incompetents. In the case of guardianship

over a minor, a case study report is required. The
court shall order a social worker to conduct a case
study report of the minor and all the prospective
guardians and submit his report and recommendation
to the court before the scheduled hearing. (S9 RGM)
•

May the social worker intervene in the guardianship
case?

A.

Yes. The social worker may intervene on behalf of the
minor if he finds that the petition for guardianship should
be denied. (S9 RGM).

138

RULE 93
Appointment of Guardians

Q.

May the petition be opposed or contested?

A.

Yes. Any interested person may, by filing a written
opposition, contest the petition on the gromnd of
majority of the alleged minor, gompetency of the
alleged incompetent, or the unsuitability of the person
for whon letters are prayed (MCU), and may pray that
the petition be dismissed, or that the letters of
guardianship issue to himself, or to any suitable
person named in the opposition. (S4 R93, S10 RGM)

Q.

What happens at the hearing of the petition?

A.

At the hearing, the alleged incompetent must be
present if able to attend, and it must be shown that
the required notice has been given. The court shall
then hear the evidence of the parties and If the person
is proved to be incompetent or if the grounds for the
appointment of a guardian over a minor are proved,
the court shall appoint a suitable guardian of his
person or property, or both. In guardianship over minors,
the prospective ward shall be presented to the court.
(S11 RGM). In guardianship over the property of a
non-resident minor, the court may dispense with the
presence of the non-resident minor. (S12 RGM),

Q.

What ls the rule on service of final orders or judgments?

A.

Final orders or judgments under R93 shall be served
on the civil registrar of the municipality where the
incompetent person resides or where his property or
part thereof is situated. (S8 R93)
In guardianship over minors, the final and
executory judgment or order shall be served upon the
Local Civil Registrar of the municipality or city where
the minor resides and the Register of Deeds of the
place where his property or part thereof is situated
shall annotate the same in the corresponding title,
and report his compliance to the court. (S13 RGM),
139

RULE 94. BONDS OF GUARDIANS
Q.

ls a bond required of guardians?

A.

Yes. Before a guardian enters upon the execution of
his trust or before letters of guardianship shall issue,
the guardian shall post a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties. (S1 R94, $14 RGM)

Q.

Are parents who are the guardians of their minor
child required to furnish a bond?

A.

In the case of guardianship over the person of the minor
child. the parents are not required to furnish a bond.

In the case of guardianship over the property of
the minor child, the parents are required to furnish a
bond if the market value of the property or the annual

income of the child exceeds P50,000. The parent
concerned shall furnish a bond in such amount as the
court may determine, but in no case less than 10% of

the value of such property or the annual income, to
guarantee the performance of the obligations prescribed
for general guardians. (S16 RGM; Art. 225, Family Code)
A verified petition for approval of the bond shall
be filed in the Family Court of the place where the
child resides or, if the child resides in a foreign
country, in the Family Court of the place where the
property or any part thereof shall be situated.The petition
shall be docketed as a summary judicial proceeding.
(Id.) Hence the judgment therein shall be immediately
final and executory. (Art. 247, Family Code).

140

RULE 95. SELLING AND ENCUMBERING
PROPERTY OF THE WARD
0.

May a guardian sell or encumber property of the
incompetent?

A.

Yes provided that the guardian presents a verified
petition to the court by which he was appointed
praying for such an order and provided there are valid
grounds for the grant of such authority, (S1 R95), A
mere motion will not suffice.

Q.

What is the effect if the guardian sells or encumbers
the ward's property without prior court authority?

A.

The sale would be unenforceable. (Article 1403(1],
Civil Code)

Q.

What are the grounds for the grant of authority
to the guardian to sell or encumber the estate of
the ward?

A.
1)

When the income of the estate under guardianship

is insufficient to maintain the ward and his family; or
2) When it appears that it is for the benefit of the
ward that his real estate or some part thereof be
sold or mortgaged or otherwise encumbered, and
the proceeds thereof put out at interest, or
invested in some productive security, or in the
improvement of security of other real estate of the
ward. (S1 R95)
It is not necessary for the grant of authority to
sell that the ward's income be insufficient to maintain
and educate him, it being enough that the sale is for
the ward's benefit. (Tavera v. EI Hogar, 98 Phil. 481)
141

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

When the court authorizes the sale of the ward's
property, may this be done in a private sale?

A.

Yes, the property may be sold at a public or private
sale. (S4 R95). However if the ward is a minor, the

sale of his or her property may be had only in a public
sale. (S22 RGM).

142

RULE 96. GENERAL POWERS AND
DUTIES OF GUARDIANS
Q

In general, what is the authority of the guardian?

A,

In general, a guardian has full authority to take
possession of the property of the ward and to perform
all acts necessary for its management, and to bring
and defend such actions as may be needed for this
purpose. (Caniza v. Court of Appeals, 268 SCRA 640),

Q.

May a guardian pay the debts of the ward?

A.

Yes. Every guardian must pay the ward's Just debts
out of his personal estate and the income of his real
estate. In case of insufficiency, the guardian may pay
out of the ward's real estate after obtaining a court order
for its sale or encumbrance, (S2 R96; S17[a] RGM).

Q.

What proceedings should be taken when a person
is suspected of embezzling or concealing the
ward's property?

A.

Upon complaint of the guardian or ward, or cf any
person having actual or prospective interest in the
ward's estate as creditor, heir, or otherwise, that
anyone is suspected of having embezzled, concealed,
or conveyed away any money, goods, or Interest
belonging to the ward or his estate, the court may cite
the suspected person to appear for examination and
make such orders as will secure the estate against
such embezzlement, concealment, or conveyance.
(S6 R96, S18[c] RGM)

143

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May the guardianship court under S6 R96 and
$18[c] of the RGM resolve the issue of title

to the property allegedly embezzled, concealed,
or conveyed?
A.

No. While the guardianship court may issue an order
directing a person suspected of having embezzled,
concealed or disposed of a ward's property to appear
for examination regarding such property, it may not
resolve the issue of title to the property because such

an issue should be threshed out in a separate
ordinary action and not in a guardianship proceeding.
Exception would be in a case where the ward's title to

the property is clear and indisputable in which case
the guardianship court may issue an order directing
its delivery or retum to the guardian. (Paciente v
Dacuycuy, 114 SCRA 924).

144

RULE 97. TERMINATION OF GUARDIANSHIP
Q.

When is the guardianship terminated?

A.

If upon petition by the person declared incompetent,
or his guardian, relative, or friend, and after trial, it is
judicially determined that the person is no longer
Incompetent, his competency shall be adjudged and
the guardianship shall cease. (S1 R97). The guardianship
may also be terminated when it appears that the
guardianship is no longer necessary. (S3 R97)

The court motu proprio or upon verified motion of
any person allowed to file a petition for guardianship
may terminate the guardianship on the ground that
the ward has come of age or has died. (S25 RGM).
Q.

Wanting to unclog his docket and coming across

the records of Special Proceedings No. 501, a
guardianship case involving a minor with properties
worth more than a million pesos, and finding the
said case to have been pending way back in 1981,
after petitioner had presented but only 3 witnesses,
following the appointment of Dizon as guardian,
Judge Jurado of Nueva Ecija Regional Trial Court
dismissed the case for failure to prosecute.
Discuss with reasons the validity of said order of
dismissal. (85 Bar Q18)

A.

The order of dismissal was not valid. The provisions
of S3 R17, which apply to actions, should not be
unqualifiedly applied to special proceedings. especially a
guardianship proceeding over a minor, wherein the
court should observe the "best interests of the minor"
standard. The court should conduct a clarificatory hearing
to determine why the case had been pending for so
long and order the parties to proceed with dispatch.

145

RULE 98. TRUSTEES
0.

What is a trust?

A.

It is a fiduciary relationship concerning property whereby

confidence is reposed upon a person who hold legal
title over the property and deals with it for the benefit
of another.
Q.

Who is a trustee?

A.

The person in whom confidence is reposed as regards
property for the benefit of another person. (Article
1440, Civil Code). R98 provides for the procedure for
the appointment of a trustee.

Q.

Distinguish a trust from guardianship, administration,
or executorship.

A.

In a trust, the trustee or holder has legal title to the
property, while a guardian, administrator, or executor
does not. (4 EDGAR PARAS, CIVIL CODE OF THE
PHILIPPINES 739 (11" ed., 1985]

Q.

When is the appointment of a trustee under R98
necessary?

A.

Such appointment is necessary if a testator has
omitted in his will to appoint a trustee in the
Philippines, and if such appointment is necessary to

carry into effect the provisions of thewill (S2 R98).
In such a case, a petition for appointment of a trustee

shall be filed.
Q.

Which court appoints the trustee?

A.

The court in which the will was allowed, in the case of
a will allowed in the Philippines, If the will was allowed
in a foreign country, then the RRTC of the place in
which the property, or some portion thereof, affected

146

RULE 98
Trustees

by the trust ls situated. (S1 R98). Hence the petition
for appointment of a trustee shall be filed with the

foregoing courts.
Q.

When land in the Philippines is held in trust for
Philippine residents by a trustee who had been
appointed abroad, is he still required to file a
petition in the Philippines?

A.

Yes. Such trustee shall file a petition in the RTC
having jurisdiction over the place where the land is
situated and after due notice to all persons interested,
shall be ordered to apply to the court for appointment
as a trustee. (S4 R98), The reason is that the foreign
appointment does not extend to lands here in the
Philippines.

Q.

Is a trustee required to post a bond?

A.

Yes. Before entering on the duties of his trust, the
trustee shall file a bond with the court having
jurisdiction over the trust.

Q

May a trustee be exempted from the requirement
of posting a bond?

A

Yes. The court may exempt a trustee appointed in the
wilt from posting a bond if the testator has directed or
requested such exemption. The court may exempt
any trustee (whether appointed in the will or not) when
all persons beneficially interested in the trust, being of
legal age, request such exemption (S5 R98). Compare
with an executor who may not be exempted from
posting a bond even if such exemption is directed in
the will. (S2 R81).

Q.

What are the conditions included in the bond?

A.

The following conditions shall be deemed a part of the
bond whether written therein or not:
147

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

1) INVENTORY. The trustee shall submit to the court
an inventory of the personal and real estate
belonging to him as trustee which shall have
come to his possession or knowledge.
2)

MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSITION. The trustee

shall manage and dispose of such estate and
faithfully discharge his trust In relation thereto.
3) ACCOUNT The trustee shall render under oath at

least once a year until his trust is fulfilled an
account of the property in his hands and of the
management and disposition thereof.
4)

SETTLEMENT OF ACCOUNTS. The trustee shall

settle his accounts and deliver the remaining
estate in his hands to those entitled thereto.
(S6 R98)
Q.

Compare the accounts rendered by the trustees to
those rendered by administrators or executors.

A.

Accounts of trustees and guardians must be under
oath and shall be filed annually, Accounts of
administrators or executors are not required to be
under oath and, except for the initial and final submission
of their accounts, they shall be filed only on such
times as may be required by the court.

148

ADOPTION
Q.

What is adoption?

A.

Adoption is a juridical act which creates between two

persons a relationship similar to that which results
from legitimate paternity and filiation. (4 Valverde 473

cited in 1 ARTURO TOLENTINO, CIVIL CODE OF
THE PHILIPPINES 649 [1985 ed.]).
•

What rule governs the procedure for adoption?

A.

The Supreme Court Rule on Adoption (ROA) effective
22 August 2002. (A.M. No, 02-6-02-SC) This rule
covers both domestic adoption and inter-country adoption.

Q.

What is the jurisdiction and venue of an adoption
proceeding?

A.

The petition for adoption shall be filed with the Family
Court of the province or city where the prospective
adoptive parents reside. (S6 ROA). The ROA however
does not provide for the venue if the prospective
adoptive parents are non-residents. It is submitted
that in such a case, venue is laid with the Family
Court of the province or city where the prospective
adoptee resides since it may be said that the res is
located therein.

Q.

Remedios, claiming that she is the adopted daughter
of the deceased Toribio, filed with the RTC an
action for partition of Torlblo's estate. Petitioner
filed an answer alleging that Remedios was not
validly adopted as the adoption decree issued by
the then Court of First Instance (CFl) was fraudulently
secured. The RTC dismissed the action for partition
on the ground that Remedios was not validly
adopted. Did the RTC act properly In dismissing
the action on that ground?
149

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

No. The RTC «did not have the jurisdiction to determine

or to review the validity of the decree of adoption
issued by the erstwhile CFI by virtue of the equal rank
and category between the RTC and the CFI, The
proper court with jurisdiction to do so was the CA,
which has been vested by Section 9 of Batas
Pambansa Blg. 129 16 with the exclusive original
jurisdiction over actions for the annulment of the
judgments of the RTC. (Oribello v. CA, 5 August
2015, Bersamin, J.)
Q.

Who may adopt?

A.
1)

Any Filipino citizen of le.al age, of ood moral
character, has not been convicted of any crime

involving moral turpitude, and at least 16 years
older than the adoptee, and who is in a position to
support and care for his children in keeping with
the means of the family. The 16-year-difference
requirement may be waived when the adopter is
the biological parent of the adoptee or is the
spouse of the adoptee's parent.
2) Any alien possessing the same qualifications for
Filipinos, whose country has diplomatic relations
with the Philippines, who has been living in the
Philippines for at least 3 consecutive years prior
to the filing of the adoption petition and maintains
such residence until the entry of the adoption
decree, who has been certified by his diplomatic
or consular office or any appropriate government
agency to have the legal capacity to adopt in his
country, and whose government allows the adoptee
to enter his country as his adopted child, (CARD)

150

ADOPTION

•

May the residency and certification requirements
for an alien be waived?

A.

Yes. The residency and certification requirements (for
an alien) may be waived for the following: (FMM)
a)

a former Filipino who seeks to adopt a relative
within the 4" degree of consanguinity or affinity; or

b) MARRIED TO A FILIPINO: one who seeks to adopt
the legitimate chid
l of his Filipino spouse; or

c)

MARRIED TO A FILIPINO: one who Is married to

a Filipino and seeks to adopt jointly with his spouse a
relative within the 4" degree of consanguinity or
affinity of the Filipino spouse.
The exceptions may be restated as follows: (FM)

(1) a former Filipino who seeks to adopt a relative
within the 4" degree; and
(2) one who is married to a Flip.ino, and the person to
be adopted is a relative of the Filipino within the
4" degree. If the relative to be adopted is other
than a legitimate child of the Filipino, the spouses
must jointly adopt.
Q.

May a guardian adopt his ward?

A.

Yes, provided it is done after the termination of the
guardianship and clearance of his financial accountabilities.
(S4 ROA)

Q.

Is it required that spouses jointly adopt?

A.

Yes, the husband and wife shall jointly adopt The
exceptions are (LIS):

151

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
1)

2)

If one spouse seeks to adopt the legitimate child
of the other spouse. This is not really an exception
since the other spouse obviously cannot adopt
his own legitimate child.
If one spouse seeks to adopt his own illegitimate

child, provided that the other spouse has given
his consent thereto. If one spouse seeks to adopt
the other's illegitimate child, both spouses must
jointly adopt.
3) If the spouses are legally separated from each other,

(S4 ROA)
(Note that the requirements are nationality neutral
unlike those for the residency and certification
requirements. Note that they only apply to a child
unless the spouses are legally separated).
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a former
Filipino citizen who has an Illegitimate child named
Frances. Frances ls staying with Edna's mother in
the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States.

a)

Must Edna and Peter Jointly adopt or may Edna
alone adopt Frances?

b) Are the requirements on residency and certification
applicable to the petition for adoption of Frances?
A.

a) Edna alone may adopt Frances provided Peter has
given his consent thereto. (See No. 2 in the preceding
answer), Peter and Edna may jointly adopt Frances.

b)

If Edna alone adopts Frances, the requirements
on residency and certification do not apply to her,
since Edna is a former Filipino who seeks to
adopt a relative within the 4" degree of consanguinity

152

ADOPTION

or affinity. However if Pater and Edna choose to
jointly adopt Frances the requirements of residency
and certification apply to Peter since Edna is not
a Filipino but only a former Filipino.

Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
Filipino citizen who has an illegitimate child named
Frances. Frances is staying with Edna's mother in
the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States.
a)

Must Edna and Peter jointly adopt or may Edna
alone adopt Frances?

b)

Are the requirements on residency and certification
applicable to the petition for adoption of
Frances?

a)

Edna alone may adopt Frances provided Peter
has given his consent thereto. Edna and Peter
may also jointly adopt Frances.

A.

b) The residency and certification requirements are
not applicable to Edna who is a Filipino citizen.
They also do not apply to Peter if he chooses to
adopt Jointly with Edna. This is because he ls
adopting jointly with his Filipino spouse the latter's
relative within the 4" degree of consanguinity
or affinity.
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a former
Filipino citizen who has a niece named Frances.
Frances is staying with Edna's mother in the
Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States.
a)

Must Edna and Peter jointly adopt or may Edna
alone adopt Frances?

153

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

b)

Are

the

requirements

on

residency

and

certification applicable to the petition for
adoption of Frances?

A.
a)

Edna and Peter must jointly adopt. This is because
Frances is not a child of Edna but only a niece.
The exceptions from joint adoption apply only in
case of adoption of a child or in case of legal
separation.

b) The requirements on residency and certification do
not apply to Edna, a former Filipino who seeks to
adopt a relative within the 4" degree. They however
apply to Peter since he is not married to a Filipino.
Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a former
Filipino citizen who has a niece named Frances.
Both Peter and Edna are residents of the United
States, Frances is staying with Edna's mother in
the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States. Edna asks you for
advice on whether she can file a petition for adoption
of Frances. What would be your advice?

A.

I would advice that she cannot file a petition for the
adoption of Frances. While the residency requirements
do not apply to Edna, it should be noted that Edna
and Peter must jointly adopt since the relative to be
adopted by Edna is not the child either of Edna or
Peter. However since Peter is an alien, he cannot
adopt since he has not fulfilled the residency requirement.
Nor is Peter exempted from the residency requirement
since he is not married to a Filipino.

Q.

Peter, an American citizen, married Edna, a
Filipino citizen who has a niece named Frances.
Both Peter and Edna are residents of the United
States. Frances is staying with Edna's mother in

154

ADOPTION

the Philippines. Edna wants to adopt Frances and
bring her to the United States. Edna asks you for
advice on whether she can file a petition for
adoption of Frances. What would be your advice?
A.

I would advise that she can file a petition to adopt
Frances but both she and Peter must jointly adopt
Frances. This is not exempted from the rule requiring
joint adoption since the relative to be adopted is
neither Edna's or Peter's child. Nonetheless Peter is
exempted from the residency requirement since he is
married to a Filipino and seeks to adopt jointly with
her a relative of Edna within the 4" degree.

Q.

May the petition also pray for the change of name
of the adoptee?

A.

Yes. (S10 ROA)

O.

ls the change of name limited only to the adoptee's
surname?

A.

No. There are no restrictions in this regard under S10
of the ROA. In fact S10(c) states that in case the
petition also prays for change of name, the title or
caption must contain the registered name of the child
and the full name by which the child is to be known.

O.

If the petition and attachments are sufficient in
form and substance, what is the next step to be
done by the court?

A.

The court shall issue an order which shall contain the
registered name of the adoptee and the names by
which the adoptee has been known, the purpose of
the petition, and the complete name which the adoptee
will use if the petition is granted. The order shall also
state the date and place of the hearing and shall

155

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
direct that a copy thereof be published before the date
of hearing at least once a week for three consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
province or city where the court is situated.
Q.

Is it required that a copy of the order of hearing be
furnished to the Office of the Solicitor General?

A.

No, The trial court however at its discretion order the
service of a copy of the order of hearing to the OSG
through the provincial or city prosecutor. (S12 ROA),

Q.

Rafael, a wealthy bachelor, filed a petition for the
adoption of Dolly, a one-year-old foundling who
had a severe heart ailment. During the pendency
of the adoption proceedings, Rafael died of natural
causes. The Office of the Solicitor General flies a
motion to dismiss the petition on the ground that
the case can no longer proceed because of the
petitioner's death.
a) Should the case be dismissed? Explain.
b) Will your answer be the same if it was Dolly
who died during the pendency of the adoption
proceedings? Explain. (09 Bar Q13 Civil Law)

A.
a)

No. Under S16 of the ROA, a decree of adoption
shall take effect as of the date the original petition
was filed even f the petitioner(s) die before its
issuance. Hence the death of the petitioner Rafael
will not result in the dismissal of the case

b) No, my answer will not be the same. In such a
case the motion to dismiss should be granted.
The death of Dolly extinguishes her legal personality
or juridical capacity; thus she may no longer be
adopted. (Article 37, Civil Code).
156

ADOPTION

Q.

May an adopter rescind the adoption?

A.

Adoption, being in the best interests of the child, shall
not be subject to rescission by the adopter. However,

the adopter may disinherit the adoptee for causes
provided in Article 919 of the Civil Code. (S19 ROA)
Q.

May an adoptee rescind the adoption?

A.

Yes. Upon verified petition fled by the adoptee who
is over 18 years of age, or with the assistance of the
Department of Social Welfare and Development if he
is a minor, or by his guardian or counsel if over 18 but
is incapacitated, the rescission may be rescinded
based on any of the following grounds committed by
the adopter:
1) Repeated physical and verbal maltreatment by the
adopter despite having undergone counseling;

2) Attempt on the life of the adoptee;

3) Sexual abuse or violence; or
4) Abandonment or failure to comply with parental
obligations. (S19 ROA).
Q.

What is the jurisdiction and the venue of the petition
for rescission of adoption?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Family Court of the
city or province where the adoptee resides. (S20 ROA)

Inter-country Adoption

0.

What is inter-country adoption?

A.

It is the procedure whereby a foreigner or a Filipino
permanently residing abroad can adopt a Filipino child
who cannot be placed in a foster or an adoptive family
or cannot, in any suitable manner, be cared for in the
Philippines. (S27 ROA)

157

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Where is the petition for intercountry adoption filed?

A.

With the Family Court where child resides or may be
found, The petition may be filed directly with the InterCountry Adoption Board (ICAB) in the country of the
prospective adopters. (S28 ROA).

Q.

What is the duty of the court after the petition has
been filed?

A.

The court, after finding that the petition is sufficient in
form and substance and a proper case for intercountry adoption, shall immediately transmit the petition
to the 1CAB for appropriate action. (S32 ROA)

Q.

What is the standard to be observed in intercountry adoption cases?

A.

The standard to be observed is the best interest of
the minor" or "best interest of the child" standard.
This is snown by the declaration of policy of the ICAA

(S2) which provides that the State shall take measures to
ensure that inter-country adoptions are allowed when
the same shall prove beneficial to the child's best

interests, and shall protect his/her fundamental rights.
The Philippine contingent to the September 2005

Hague Convention stressed that intercountry adoption
was one that should operate as a child-centered
measure, and not with a focus on the needs of the

prospective adoptive parents.
Q.

What is meant by the "last resort" policy In inter-

country adoption?
A.

It means that it is the State policy to encourage
domestic adoption so as to preserve the child's
identity and culture in his/her native land, and only
when this is not available shall intercountry adoption
be considered as a last resort. (Sec. 2, ICAA).

158

ADOPTION

Q.

Petitioners spouses are U.S. citizens who have
been continuously residing In the Philippines for
three consecutive years prior to the filing of a
petition for domestic adoption of a minor with the
RTC. The RTC lssued an order for the transmittal
of the case records to the Inter-Country Adoption
Board (ICAB), holding that since the petitioners
are both aliens, a petition for inter·country adoption,
rather than for domestic adoption, should have
been filed. Did the RTC act correctly?

A.

No, Aliens may adopt under Domestic Adoption Act if
they have resided for at least three consecutive years
in the Philippines prior to the filing of the petition for
adoption, Thus, the petition for adoption was appropriately

filed under the Domestic Adoption Act, which tho
appropriate Family Court or RTC can properly take
cognizance of. (Park v. Liwanag, 926 SCRA 390,
Hernando, J. [2019])
Q.

Give the basic distinctions between domestic
adoption and inter-country adoption.

ASTO

DOMESTIC
ADOPTION

INTERCOUNTRY
ADOPTION

Governing
law

Domestic Adoption Act
of 1998 (DAA); SC
Rule on Adoption
(ROA)

Inter-Country
Adoption Act of 1995
(ICAA); ROA

Judicial adoption

Extrajudicial adoption

Filipinos (w some
exceptions) adopting
other Filipinos

Aliens or Filipinos
permanently residing
abroad adopting
Filipinos

Procedure
4

Coverage

159

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Who may

S4 ROA

Alien or Filipino
permanently residing
abroad may file an
application for
intercountry adoption

S5 ROA

Legally free child (S8

adopt

Who may be
adopted
Where
petition

ICAA)

-

FC where adopter

FC where child

resides, If adopter
non-resident, with FC
where child resides or

resides or may be
found/ICAB in the
country of

may be found

prospective
adopters

If filed w FC and
finds petition to be
proper, it shall
ansrnlt pet lo ICAB

Change of
name

May be included in
petition

160

f

Not included in
petition to adopt

RULE 102. HABEAS CORPUS
Q.

What is the writ of habeas corpus?

A.

The writ of habeas corpus is the order of the court
requiring the person to whom it is issued to produce
the person alleged to be restrained of his liberty or whose
rightful custody has been withheld and to justify such
person's detention or custody. (S1, 5 & 6 R102).
The remedy or special proceeding for obtaining
the writ is a petition for writ of habeas corpus.

Q.
A,

What is a writ?
Under the common law, a prerogative writ was a form

of command issued by the court in the name of the
King. Today these are a class of writs issued by
courts in furtherance of its discretionary powers and
are not granted as a matter of right. (STEVEN H,
GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 159 (1975)). Under Philippine
procedural law, the prerogative writs are the (1) writ of
habeas corpus (Rule 102, Rules of Court), (2) writ of
amparo (SC Rules on the Writ of Amparo), (3) writ of
habeas data (SC Rules on the Writ of Habeas Data),
(4) writ of continuing mandamus (Rules of Procedure
for Environmental Cases), and (5) writ of kalikasan (ie.)"°
Q.

To what cases does the writ of habeas corpus
extend?

A.

The writ of habeas corpus shall extend to all cases of
illegal confinement or detention by which any person
is deprived of his liberty or by which the rightful
custody of any person is withheld from the person
entitled thereto. (S1 R102).

wile B.P. Big 129 mentions wnits of certicrani, prohibition, and mandamus,
the issuance of a writ is not provided for in R5 of the Ruis of Court.

161

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME 11
Q.

The President issued a proclamation suspending
the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in
Mindanao because of widespread rebellion. Jose,
who was detained by the military on the claim that
he was a rebel, filed a petition for writ of habeas
corpus with the RTC of Zamboanga City. The RTC

dismissed forthwith the petition citing the action
taken by the President. Did the RTC act correctly
in dismissing forthwith the petition?
A.

No. It should be noted that Article VII, Section 18 of
the Constitution empowers the President to suspend
only the privilege of the writ not the writ itself.3°

The writ is the order requiring the person to
whom it is issued to produce the body of the person
alleged to be restrained of his liberty and to justify the
detention, The writ issues as a matter of course when
it appears from the petition that the writ ought to
issue, the suspension of the privilege notwithstanding,
(S5 R102). On the other hand, the privilege of the writ
is the further order inqulfing into the cause of detention
and directing the release of the person if he is illegally
detained. (S15 R102)
Only where the return of the respondent shows
that the person in custody is being held for an offense
covered by the suspension (le., rebellion or offenses
inherent in or directly connected with invasion) and in
a place where the suspension is effective will the court
dismiss the petition. In all other cases, it must continue
the proceedings to determine the validity of the person's
detention. ISAGANI A CRUZ, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
262-63 1989 ed, JOAQUIN G, BERNAS THE 1987
PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION A COMPREHENSIVE
REVIEWER 146 :2011 ed.

"see also Art. II, Section 15 of the Constitution

162

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Here the RTC judge should have issued the writ
of habeas corpus directing the respondent military to
produce Jose before it and to file a return. Only where

the return of the military shows that Jose is being
detained for the crime of rebellion should it dismiss
the petition.
Q.

Which courts have jurisdiction over a petition for
writ of habeas corpus?

A.

There Is concurrent jurisdiction among the Supreme
Court, Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan (in aid of
appellate jurisdiction), and the Regional Trial Court.
If filed with the RTC, the venue is with the RTC In the
judicial region where the writ is sought to be enforced.
(2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO 156-57 [9" rev. ed., 3°
printing]). The Municipal Trial Court has special jurisdiction
in the absence of all the RTC judges in the province
or city. ($35 B.P. BIg. 129)

A verified petition for a writ of habeas corpus
involving custody of minors shall be filed with the
Family Court. However the petition may be filed with
the regular court in the absence of the presiding judge

of the Family Court, provided, however, that the
regular court shall refer the case to the Family Court
as soon as its presiding judge returns to duty. The
petition may also be filed with the appropriate regular
courts in places where there are no Family Courts.
The petition may likewise be filed with the Supreme
Court, Court of Appeals, or with any of its members.
The writ may be made returnable to a Family Court or

to any regular court within the region where the
petitioner resides or where the minor may be found
for hearing and decision on the merits. (S20, Rule on
Custody of Minors and Writ of Habeas Corpus in
Relation to Custody of Minors).

163

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
The Famlly Courts Act of 1997 did not revoke the

jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeals to issue writs of habeas corpus relating to the
custody of minors. (S20 SC Rule on Custody of Minors

and Writ of Habeas Corpus in Relation thereto;
Thornton v. Thornton, 16 August 2004).
Q.

May a writ of habeas corpus issued by the
Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals be made
returnable before an RTC for hearing and decision
on the merits?

A.

Yes. (S2 R102)

Q.

A writ of habeas corpus was issued by the CA but
It made the same returnable before an RTC for
hearing and decision on the merits, From the RTC

decision, should the aggrieved party appeal to the
CA or to the SC?

A.

To the CA. Once the superior court makes the writ
returnable to a lower court as allowed by the Rules of
Court, the lower court designated does not thereby
become merely a recommendatory body, whose findings
and conclusions are devoid of effect. The decision on
the petition for habeas corpus Is a decision of the
lower court, not of the superior court. Hence the
RTC's decision should be appealed to the CA. (In re
Datukan Malang Salibo, 8 April 2015, Leonen, J.).

Q.

May the Sandiganbayan grant petitions for the
issuance of a writ of habeas corpus in the exercise
of its original jurisdiction? (09 Bar Q11c ed)

A.

No, the Sandiganbayan has jurisdiction to issue the
writ of habeas corpus only in aid of its appellate
jurisdiction. (Sec. 4, PD NO. 1606)

164

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Q.

What is the territorial extent of the enforceability
of a writ of habeas corpus?

A.

Writs issued by the Supreme Court, the Court of
Appeals, and the Sandiganbayan are enforceable
anywhere in the Philippines. Those issued by the RTC
and MTC are enforceable only within the judicial region
to which they belong. (Sec. 3[a], Interim Rules)

Q.

What ls the form of the petition for writ of habeas
corpus and what are the contents thereof?

A.

Application for the writ shall be by a petition signed
and verified by the party for whose relief it is intended
or by some other person on his behalf, and shall set
forth: (PICO)
(a) The person subject of the application is imprisoned
or restrained of his liberty;
(b) The officer or name of the person by whom he is
imprisoned or restrained; or if both are unknown
er uncertain, such officer or person may be
described by an assumed name;
(c) The place where he is imprisoned or restrained, if
known; and
(d)

A copy of the commitment or detention order If it
can be procured without impairing the efficiency
of the remedy; or if the imprisonment or restraint
is without any legal authority, such fact shall be
slated. (S3 R102).

Q.

May the petition be entertained by the court even
if it does not comply with S3 R102?

A.

Yes. Strict compliance with the technical requirements
for a habeas corpus petition as provided in the Rules
of Court may be dispensed with where the allegations
in the application are sufficient to make out a case for

165

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

habeas corpus. Indeed, in the landmark case of
Villavicencio v. Lukban, 39 Phil. 778, the Supreme
Court declared that it is the duty of a court to issue the

writ if there is evidence that a person is unjustly
restrained of his liberty within its jurisdiction even if
there is no application therefor. A petition which is
deficient in form, such as a petition-letter, may be
entertained so long as its allegations sufficiently make
out a case for habeas corpus. (Fletcher v. Director of
BuCor, UDK-14071, 17 July 2009)
Q.

Who may file a petition for writ of habeas corpus?

A.

The party for whose relief It Is intended or by some
person on his behalf (83 R102). In a habeas corpus
proceeding, any person may apply for the writ on
behalf of the aggrieved party. (Boac v. Cadapan, 31
May 2011, Carpio Morales, J.).

a.

is the writ of habeas corpus available to one who
was released on bail?

A.

No, because actual physical restraint is required.
(Gonzales v. Viola, 61 Phil. 824 [1935])

Q.

When is the writ of habeas corpus not allowed?

A.

If it appears that the person to be restrained of his
liberty is in the custody of an officer under process
issued by a court or judge; or by virtue of a judgment
or order of a court of record, and that court or judge
had jurisdiction to issue the process, render the
judgment, or make the order, the writ shall not be
allowed, If the jurisdiction appears after the writ is
allowed, the person shall not be discharged by reason
of any informality or defect in the process, judgment,
or order. (S4 R102)

166

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

While S4 R102 refers to restraint of a person
under process of a court of record, such process may
also be issued by a governmental agency authorized
to order a person's confinement, such as the Bureau

of Immigration

•

May the writ of habeas corpus issue in favor of
military officers detained by virtue of court-martial
proceedings? May habeas corpus be availed of to
correct allegedly inhuman or cruel detention?

A.

No. The writ of habeas corpus will not issue where the
person alleged to be restrained of liberty is in the
custody of an officer under a process issued by a
court which has jurisdiction to do so. Since Major
quino stands charged in court martial proceedings
for alleged violations of Article 67 (attempting to begin
or create a mutiny) and Article 96 (conduct unbecoming
an officer and a gentleman), the legality of his arrest
ls settled and the writ is unavailing. Furthermore, the
writ of habeas corpus is not the proper mode to

question conditions of confinement, the writ will only
lie if what is questioned is the fact or duration of
confinement. (Aquino v. Esperon, G.R. No, 174994,
31 August 2007).
Q.

Together with his superior, Major General Palparan,

the petitioner Sgt. Osorio was charged with
kidnapping before the RTC of Malolos City for
allegedly kidnapping U.P. students Karen Empeno
and Sherlyn Cadapan. The petitioner was arrested
and detained at the Philippine Army Custodial
Center. Contending that he was being illegally
deprived of his liberty, peitioner
t
filed a Petition
for Habeas Corpus before the Court of Appeals.
Sgt. Osorio mainly argued that courts-martial, not
a civil court such as the Regional Trial Court, had
jurisdiction to try the criminal case considering

167

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

that he was a soldier on active duty and that the
offense charged was allegedly "service-connected."
$Sgt. Osorio added that he could not be charged
with the felony of kidnapping and serious illegal
detention because under Article 267 of the Revised
Penal Code, the felony may only be committed by

a private individual, not a ranking officer of the
Armed Forces of the Philippines. Will the writ of
habeas corpus lie?
A

No. A writ of habeas corpus may no longer be issued
if the person allegedly deprived of liberty is restrained
under a lawful process or order of the court. The
restraint then has become legal. Therefore, the remedy
of habeas corpus is rendered moot and academic.
In availing himself of habeas corpus, Sgt. Osorio
mainly contends that the Regional Trial Court that
issued the warrants for his arrest had no jurisdiction to
take cognizance of the kidnapping case against him.
Sgt. Osorio's claim lacks merit.
The Regional Trial Court properly took cognizance
of the kidnapping case against him. Republic Act No.
7055, Section 1 provides that if the accused ls a
member of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and
the crime involved is one punished under the Revised
Penal Code, civil courts shall have the authority to
hear, try, and decide the case.

Kidnapping is not part of the functions of a
soldier Even if a public officer has the legal duty to
detain a person, the public officer must be able to
show the existence of legal grounds for the detention.
Without these legal grounds, the public officer Is
deemed to have acted in a private capacity and ls
considered a "private individual." (Osorio v. Navera,
26 February 2018, Leonen, J.).
168

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Q.

Datukan Malang Salibo learned that police officers
suspected him of being Butukan S. Malang, one of
the persons for whom an arrest warrant had been
issued for involvement in the Maguindanao Massacre.
Datukan presented himself before the police
officers in order to clear his name but eventually
he was arrested and detained. May Datukan avail
of a petition for a writ of habeas corpus?

A.

Yes. Habeas corpus is the proper remedy for a person
deprived of liberty due to mistaken identity. In such
cases, the person is not held under any lawful process
and is continuously being illegally detained. (In re
Datukan Malang Salibo, 8 April 2015, Leonen, J.)

0.

Petitioner, the wife of Pot Basser Ampatuan, filed
a petition for habeas corpus alleging the illegal
detention of her husband, PQt Ampatuan was
ordered by his superiors to go to Manila. Upon his
arrival in Manila, he was directed to go to a press
briefing where he was arrested for the killing of 2
COMELEC officlals. He was detained at the Manila
police station and an inquest was conducted. The
chief inquest prosecutor ordered the release of
Ampatuan for further investigation but the police
senior superintendent refused to release him.
The RTC issued the writ of habeas corpus but
subsequently dismlssed the petition upon the
police's showing that Ampatuan was placed under
restrictive custody during the pendency of a grave
administrative case against him. Should the petition
for habeas corpus be granted?

A.

No. The restrictive custody and monitoring of movements
or whereabouts of police officers under investigation
by their superiors is not a form of illegal detention or
restraint of liberty. This is sanctioned by Sec. 52.4 of
RA. No. 8551 (New DILG Act of 1990). Even assuming

169

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
that there initially was no administrative investigation
when placed in custody, the subsequent investigation

would legalize his restrictive custody. (Ampatuan v
Macaraig, 29 June 2010).
Q.

Petitioner filed with the Supreme Court a petition
for habeas corpus praying for the release of her
husband who was convicted in 2001 of illegal sale
of dangerous drugs exceeding 200 grams and
sentenced to the penalty of reclusion perpetua to
death, Petitioner contended that with the abolition
of the death penalty in 2006 pursuant to R.A. 9346,
her husband's sentence should be reverted to the
former penalty of 6 years and 1 day to 12 years
and since he has served more than that he is
entitled to be released from detention. The petition
also alleges that the husband ls entitled to early
release by virtue of the benefit of Good Conduct

Time Allowance (GCTA) under R.A. 9052.
(a) Was the petition properly filed with the Supreme
Court?

(b) May the writ of habeas corpus issue?

A.
(a) No, the petition was not properly filed with the
Supreme Court. Under the rule on hierarchy of
courts, direct recourse to the Supreme Court is
proper only if pure questions of law are raised.
Here, the petition would require a factual determination
of whether the petitioner was entitled to early
release by virtue of GCTA.
(b) No, The abolition of the death penalty did not have
any effect on other penalties, including reclusion
perpetua, which remain valid and in effect.

170

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Nor is the convict entitled to the benefit of the
GCTA since he was convicted of a heinous crime.
(Reyes v. Bantag, 10 June 2020, Zalameda, J.).
Q.

May the writ of habeas corpus be availed of in

cases of detention by virtue of a judicial process
or valid judgment?
A.

Generally no since the detention is for legal cause. In
the following cases however the writ may be availed

of as a post-conviction remedy:
(a) There has been a deprivation of a constitutional
right resulting in the restraint of a person;

(b) The court had no jurisdiction to impose the
sentence, or
(c) An excessive penalty has been imposed, as such
sentence is void as to such excess. (Harden v
Director of Prisons, 81 Phil, 741; Go • Dimagiba,
G.R. No. 151876, 21 June 2005).

Where a deprivation of a constitutional right is
established, the court that rendered the judgment is
ousted of jurisdiction and habeas corpus would lie to
challenge the legality of the detention. (Olaguer v,
Military Commission No. 34, G.R. Nos. 54558 & 69882.
22 May 1987). It is necessary however that the judgment
is no longer appealable, in which case the writ is in
the nature of a collateral attack against a final but void
judgment. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 133-34 [6° rev. ed., 2" printing], citing
Santiago v. Alipala,
k
L-25133, 28 September 1968)

171

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

a.

What Is the remedy of a convict If the results
of the post-conviction DNA testing are favorable
to him?

A.

The convict may file a petition for a writ of habeas
corpus in the court of origin if the results of the postconviction DNA testing are favorable to the convict. If
the court, after due hearing finds the petition to be
meritorious, it shall reverse or modify the judgment of

conviction and order the release of the convict. A
similar petition may be filed either in the CA or in the
SC, or with any member of said courts, which may conduct
a hearing thereon or remand the petition to the court
of origin and issue appropriate orders. (S10 Rule on

DNA Evidence). Take note that such petition for habeas
corpus may be filed by even the prosecution. (ld.)
Q.

In 1978, Pete was convicted by the then Court of
First Instance of Cavite on the sole basis of his
extrajudicial confession, The decision soon became
final and Pete has since been serving sentence
until now, although to this day, he insists that he
is innocent and that his confession was coerced.
He later learned of the Supreme Court's decision
in People v. Galit In which the Court reversed a
conviction that had been based solely on an
uncounselled confession. He forthwith caused a
petition for habeas corpus to be filed, alleging
that his confinement has all along been Illegal.
The Government opposed the petition on the
ground that the decision of conviction had long
become final and may no longer be reopened and
that he is in fact serving sentence.
Will habeas corpus lie? Reasons. (88 Bar Q15)

172

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

A.

Yes habeas corpus will lie. The writ may be availed of
as a post-conviction remedy where has been a
deprivation of a constitutional right resulting in the

restraint of a person. (Harden v. Director of Prisons,
81 Phil. 741), Where a deprivation of a constitutional

right is established, the court that rendered the Judgment
is deemed ousted of jurisdiction and habeas corpus is
the remedy to assail the legality of the detention,
(Olaguer v. Military Commission No. 34, G.R. Nos.
54558 8 69882, 22 May 1987)

Here since there was an uncounselled confession,
there was a violation of Pete's constitutional right to
counsel during custodial investigation. Hence the writ
of habeas corpus may be availed of as a postconviction remedy.
Q.

You have just been recently hired by the Public
Attorney's Office. Your boss comes into your
office bearing the file of Wawa Inocencio, who ls
in jail serving sentence for illegal possession of
drugs. The file discloses that Wawa whlle driving
his beat-up car was stopped at a police checkpoint, that the police opened his trunk and found
a large quantity of shabu, that during the trial
Wawa's lawyer failed to object to the presentation
of the seized shabu, and that the RTC's judgment
of conviction, based primarily on the evidence of
the seized shabu, was not appealed and had
become final and executory. Your boss says that
he knows Wawa as an upright law-abiding citizen.
Your boss says that things look grim for Wawa as
the judgment of conviction was already final and
executory. Your boss asks you what would be the
best legal step to be taken ln regard to Wawa's
case. What would be your reply?

173

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

I would reply that the best legal step to be taken ls to
file a petition for writ of habeas corpus on ground that

Wawa's constitutional right against unlawful search
and against the use of illegally seized evidence was

violated. Where a deprivation of a constitutional right
is ostablished, the court that rendered the judgment is
ousted of jurisdiction and habeas corpus would lie to
challenge the legality of the detention. (Olaguer v.
Military Commission No, 34, G.R. Nos. 54558 &

69882, 22 May 1987)

0.

AX was charged before the YY Regional Trial
Court with theft of jewelry valued at P20,000,
punishable with imprisonment of up to 10 years of
prision mayor under the Revised Penal Code.
After trial, he was convicted of the offense charged,
notwithstanding that the material facts duly
established during the trial showed that the offense
committed was estafa, punishable by imprisonment
of up to eight years of prision mayor under the
said Code. No appeal having been taken therefrom,
said judgment of conviction became final.
ls the judgment of conviction valid? Is the
said judgment reviewable thru a special civil action
for certiorari? Reason. (04 Bar Q5b).

A.

The judgment of conviction is not valid.
The Supreme Court has held that a judgment of
conviction is not valid if there was deprivation of the
constitutional right of the accused since the court is
ousted of jurisdiction. [Olaguer v. Military Commission
No. 34,G.R Nos. 54558 & 69882, 22 May 1987]
Here AX's was deprived of his constitutional right
to be informed of the nature of the charge against him
when he was convicted of estafa although the crime
charged was theft.

174

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

The said judgment is not reviewable thru a
special civil action for certiorari.
Under the Rules of Court, certiorari is not a
remedy for a lost appeal. Here AX should have appealed
the judgment of conviction.

Moreover, the proper remedy for AX is a petition
for writ of habeas corpus. Where a deprivation of a
constitutional right Is established, the court that
rendered the judgment is ousted of jurisdiction and
habeas corpus would lie to challenge the legality of
the detention. (Olaguer v, Military Commission No.
34, G.R. Nos. 54558 & 69882, 22 May 1987)
•

In 1999, Dimagiba was convicted of the violation
of B.P. Blg. 22 for issuing 13 bouncing checks and
sentenced by the MTC to 3 months' imprisonment
for each count and to pay indemnify Go in the
amount of Pt,3 milllon. Dimagiba's appeals were
denied and the judgment of conviction became
final in 2001. In September 2001 Dimagiba was
arrested to serve his sentence. He filed in October
2001 with the RTC a petition for habeas corpus
invoking the case of Vaca v. Court of Appeals (16
November 1998), and Administrative Circular No.
12-2000 which directs judges to give preference to
the penalty of fine rather than Imprisonment to
first-time offenders. He argues that he should be
released from detention under the principle of
retroactivity of favorable penal laws and that his
continued detention would violate his constltutlonal
right to the equal protection of laws. The RTC
granted his petition for habeas corpus and
ordered his release from detention. Was the grant
of the petition correct?

A.

No, the grant of the petition was not correct.

175

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

Dimagiba's contention that the principle of
retroactivity of penal laws would benefit him is not
correct since Adm. Cir. 12-2000 is not a law which
deleted the penalty of imprisonment but a circular
which merely established a rule of preference, subject
to the judge's discretion, in imposing penalties under
B.P. Big. 22. The SC cannot delete the penalty of
imprisonment for that would in effect be a law which
only Congress may enact.
Nor would the plea of equal protection of laws be
appropriate. This is because SC A.C. No. 12-2000 as
aforestated is not a law. Hence we apply the general

rule that habeas corpus is unavailing if a person is under
custody by virtue of legal process or a valid judgment.
(Go , Dimagibs, G.R. No. 151876, 21 June 2005).
Q.

After Alma had started serving her sentence for
violation of Batas Pambansa Blg. 22, she filed a
petition of writ of habeas corpus, citing Vaca v.
Court of Appeals where the sentence of imprisonment
of a party found guilty of violation of BP 22 was
reduced to a fine equal to double the amount of
the check involved. She prayed that her sentence
be similarly modified and that she be Immediately
released from detention, In the alternative, she
prayed that pending determination on whether the
Vaca ruling applies to her, she be allowed to post
bail pursuant to Rule 102, Sec. 4, which provides
that if a person is lawfully imprisoned or restrained
on a charge of having committed an offense not
punishable by death, he may be admitted to bail in
the discretion of the court. Accordingly, the trial
court allowed Alma to post bail and then ordered
her release. In your opinion, is the order of the
trial court correct? (08 Bar Q19).
(a) Under Rule 1027
176

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

(b) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure?

A.
(a)

In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under Rule 102.

Alma's invocation of Vaca is misplaced since
Vaca did not delete the penalty of imprisonment but
merely established a rule of preference, subject to the
judge's discretion, in the imposition of penalties under
B.P. Big. 22. Hence the judgment convicting Alma Is
valid. Under S4 R102, the writ of habeas corpus shall
not be allowed if a person is in custody by virtue of a
judgment or order of a court of record. With more reason

here where the judgment of conviction is already final.
(Go v. Dimagiba, G.R. No. 151876. June 21, 2005)
Alma's invocation of S14 R102 is also misplaced.
A perusal of $14 R102 shows that it applies only
where there is no final conviction yet as it speaks of
the bail bond being "conditioned for [the prisoner's]
appearance before the court where the offense ls
properly cognizable to abide by its order or judgment."
(b)

In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under the Rules of Criminal Procedure

S24 R114 provides that no bail shall be allowed
after a judgment of conviction has become final and
that in no case shall bail be allowed after the accused
has commenced to serve sentence,
Here Alma was already serving her sentence.
Hence bail cannot be allowed.

177

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Lex Adonis, a newspaper reporter, was convicted
of libel by the RTC of Davao City In a case filed
against him by a congressman. He was sentenced
to imprisonment and began serving his sentence
In February 2007. In January 2008, the SC issued
Administrative Circular No. 08-2008 on "Guidelines
in the Observance of a Rule of Preference in the
Imposition of Penalties in Libel Cases." Its Section 2
provides thus;
2. The Judges concerned may, in the exercise
of sound discretion, and taking into consideration
the peculiar circumstances of each case, determine

whether the imposition of a fine alone would best
serve the interests of justice or whether forbearing
to impose imprisonment would depreciate the
seriousness of the offense, work violence on the
social order, or otherwise be contrary to the
imperative of justice;
Adonis filed a Petition for Habeas Corpus
with the SC seeking the retroactive application of
the Circular. May the Petition be granted?

A.

No. The circular cannot be given retroactive effect where
the judgment in criminal case has already become
final and executory. (Adonis v. Tesoro, 5 June 2013,
Reyes, J.).

Q.

Mariano was convicted by the Regional Trial
Court for raping Victoria and meted the penalty of
reclusion perpetua. While serving sentence at the
National Penitentiary, Mariano and Victoria were
married. Mariano filed a motion in said court for
his release from the penitentiary on his claim that
under Republic Act No. 8353, his marriage to
Victoria extinguished the criminal action against

178

RULE 102

Habeas Corpus
him for rape, as well as the penalty imposed on
him. However the court denied the motion on the
ground that it had lost jurisdiction over the case
after its decision had become final and executory.
a) Is the ruling of the court correct? Explain.
b) What remedy/remedies should the counsel of
Mariano take to secure his proper and most
expeditious release from the National Penitentiary?
Explain. (05 Bar Remedial Law Q12).

A.

a)

The ruling of the court is correct. Where the
judgment has become final and executory, the
same cannot be modified or set aside anymore.
(S7 R120). The only remedy therefor is the writ of
habeas corpus. (Directo v. Director of Prisons, 56
Phil. 692; People v. Simon, G.R. No. 93028, 29
July 1994),

b) /would file a petition for habeas corpus as a postconviction remedy since the detention of Mariano
is without legal basis anymore. In this case the
writ is in the nature of a collateral attack against a
final and executory judgment. (Chavez v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No, L-29169, 19 August 1968)
The petition for habeas corpus is an expeditious
remedy since in the calendaring of cases, preference
is given to habeas corpus cases (S1 R2O) and
under S12 R102 the court before whom the writ is
returned or adjourned must immediately proceed
to hear and examine the return.
Q.

ls the remedy of habeas corpus available in
the case of forcible taking and disappearance of
a person?

179

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

A.

No. It what is alleged is forcible taking and
disappearance, not arrest and detention, the proper
remedy Is not habeas corpus but criminal investigation
and proceeding. Here the respondents denied having
custody of the missing person and there was no
adequate proof that respondents had such custody.
(Martinez v. Mendoza, G.R. 153795, 17 August 2006).
Take note however that effective 27 October 2007,
the writ of amparo is available in cases of enforced
disappearance.

0.

What is a preliminary citation and how is it
distinguished from a peremptory writ?

A.

Where the person is detained under governmental
authority and the illegality of his detention is not
patent from the petition for the writ, the court may
issue a preliminary citation to the government officer
having custody to show cause why the writ should not
issue. When the cause of the detention appears to be
patently illegal, the court may issue a peremptory writ
requiring the unconditional production before the court
of the body of the person detained at the date and
time specified. (Lee Yick Hon v. Insular Collector of
Customs, 41 Phil. 548, 30 March 21).

Withholding of rightful custody

0.

Glve examples where the writ of habeas corpus is
available where the rightful custody of any person
is withheld from the person entitled thereto.

A.
1) Parents may avail of the writ to obtain custody of
their child as against the grandparent.
2)

Wife may avail of the writ to obtain custody of her
child under seven years of age as against her
husband. (See Article 213, Family Code).

180

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

3)

A judicial guardian who was unduly deprived of
custody of her ward is entitled to a writ of habeas
corpus in order to regain custody. (Hernandez v
San Juan-Santos, 7 August 2009)

0.

Where the parents have joint custody of the child,
may one of them avail of the writ of habeas corpus
as against the other?

A.

Yes. Where both parents have joint custody of a child,
the writ may be availed of if a father is deprived of his
right to see his child. (Salientes v. Abanilla, G.R.
162734, 29 August 2006).

Q.

Is the writ of habeas corpus available to compel a
husband to llve with his wife?

A.

No. This is a matter beyond judicial authority and is
best left to the man and woman's free choice, (llusorio
v. Biloner, 332 SCRA 169).

Q.

What Jaw governs the writ of habeas corpus in
relation to custody of minors?

A.

The governing law is the Supreme Court Rule on
Custody of Minors and Writ of Habeas Corpus in
Relation to Custody of Minors effective 15 May 2003.

Q.

Husband H files a petition for declaration of nullity
of marriage before the RTC of Pasig City, Wife w
files a petition for habeas corpus before the RTC
of Pasay City, praying for the custody over thelr
minor child.

a)

H files a motion to dismiss the wife's petition
on the ground of the pendency of the case.
Rule. (07 Bar Q4),

b)

What if W had fifed the petition for habeas
corpus ahead of H's petition for declaration of
nullity of marriage? Would your ruling be the same?
181

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

a) The motion to dismiss should be granted.
The filing of a petition for declaration of nullity of
marriage automatically includes the resolution of the
issue of rightful custody pursuant to Articles 49 and
50 of the Family Code. Hence since the same subject
matter an parties are involved, then lis pendens
is present.
b)

Q.

My ruling would be the same. The petition filed by
petitioner for the declaration of nullity of marriage
before the Pasig RTC is the more appropriate
action to determine the issue of who between the
parties should have custody over the minor child
in view of the express provision of the second
paragraph of Article 50 of the Family Code. This
must be so in line with the policy of avoiding
multiplicity of suits. (Yu v. Yu, G.R. No. 164915,
10 March 2006).

The Spouses Gallardo are the parents of Maricel.
Maricel bore a child out of wedlock and then ran
away from home. She lived with Noel Bagtas and
Lydia Sioson, Afterwards Maricel left Bagtas and
Sioson hut she left with them the custody of her
child Maryl Joy after executing a document
relinquishing to Bagtas and Sioson her rights
over the child.
The Gallardos tried unsuccessfully to obtain
from Bagtas and Sioson the custody of their
granddaughter Maryl Joy. The Gallardos then filed
with the RTC a petition for habeas corpus. After
the court had issued the writ of habeas corpus,
Maryl Joy was produced before the court. Pursuant
to a compromise agreement wherein the Gallardos
would have custody of the child on Fridays,

182

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Saturdays, and Sundays and Bagtas and Sioson
on the other days,, the Gallardos were able to
obtain custody of Maryl Joy.

Later Bagtas and Sioson learned that the
Gallardos had brought the child to Samar. After
various incidents and motions between the parties,
the RTC issued an order dismissing the habeas
corpus case for having become moot and academic
since Maryl Joy had already been produced and
custody over her delivered to the Gallardos. Bagtas
and Sioson moved for the reconsideration of the
order but the motion was denied. Was the RTC'gs
order dismissing the case for having become
moot and academic proper?
A.

No. A habeas corpus case involving a minor is not
limited to the production of the minor before the court.
The main purpose of the proceeding is to determine
who has rightful custody over the child. The court
should still proceed to determine who should have the
tightfut custody of the child, (Bagtas v. Santos, G.R.
No. 166682, 27 November 2009).

0.

Queenie was born on 3 May 2012 to Renalyn and
Ricky James, who had been living together with
Renalyn's parents without the benefit of marriage.
Three years later, or In April 2015, the relationship
ended. Renalyn went to Manila, supposedly leaving
Queenie behind in the care and custody of her
father, Ricky James. Ricky James alleged that on
November 2015, Spouses Renata and Marlyn
Masbate (Renalyn's parents) took Queenie from
the school where he had enrolled her. When
asked to give Queenie back, Renalyn's parents
refused and instead showed a copy of a Special
Power of Attorney executed by Renalyn granting
full parental rights, authority, and custody over

183

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Queenie to them. Consequently Ricky James filed

a petition for habeas corpus and custody before
the RTC. A hearing was conducted in December
2015 where Renalyn brought Queenie and
expressed the desire for her daughter to remain in

her custody.
The RTC In a summary hearing ordered that
the custody of three-year-old Queenie rightfully
belongs to Renalyn, citing the second paragraph
of Article 213 of the Family Code, which states
that "[n]o child under seven [(7)] years of age shall
be separated from the mother." In the fallo of sald
Order, the RTC declared that it will "NOT GIVE
FURTHER DUE COURSE" to the petition a quo.
On appeal the CA set aside the RTC order
and remanded the case to the RTC for trial on the
issue of who has rightful custody over Queenie.
The CA however granted "temporary custody
rights" to Ricky James that will allow him to take
Queenie out once a month for a period not
exceeding 24 hours.

a) Was the CA order remanding the case to the
RTC for trial correct?
b) Was the CA's order granting temporary custody
rights to Ricky James proper?
A.

a) No. In habeas corpus case involving rightful custody
of a child, the court must conduct a trial of who
has rightful custody. The court cannot simply rely
on Article 213 of the Family Code to summarily
grant custody to the mother without a full-blown
trial since the provision contains an exceptive clause
"unless the court finds compelling reasons to
order otherwise." Also while Article 176 of the
184

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

Family Code provides that "illegitimate children
shall be under the parental authority of their
mother," case law provides that a court may order
otherwise for imperative reasons.

b) No. It should be stressed that Section 15 of A.M.
No. 03-04-04-SC provides for temporary visitation
rights, not temporary custody, as follows: "Section
15. Temporary visitation rights. - The court shall
provide in its order awarding provisional custody
appropriate visitation rights to the non-custodial

parent or parents, unless the court finds said
parent or parents unfit or disqualified." (Masbate
v. Reluclo, 30 July 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

0.

CD filed a petition for habeas corpus before the
Regional Trial Court of Caloocan City seeking to
compel TM to produce before the court CD's
biological daughter and to return custody over the
child to CD. CD resides in Manila while TM and the
child reside in Quezon City, The RTC issued the
writ of habeas corpus and the writ was served
upon TM while she was attending a preliminary
investigation in Quezon City. By way of special
appearance, TM moved for the quashal of the writ
and the dismissal of the habeas corpus case.
Arguing that the RTC-Caloocan lacked jurisdiction
over the case, TM relies on Section 3 of A.M. No.
03.04-04-SC and maintains that the habeas corpus
petition should have been filed before the family
court that has jurisdiction over CD's place of
residence or wherever the minor may be found.
TM argues also that the RTC did not acquire
jurisdiction over her person as she was not served
with summons. Rule on TM's motion to quash writ
and to dismiss case.

185

PRIMER.-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

Motion to quash writ and to dismiss case denied.
The petition for habeas corpus was properly filed
in the RTC of Caloocan. Section 3 of A.M. No. 03-04-

04-SC, which states that "the petition for custody of
minors shall be filed with the Family Court of the
province or city where the petitioner resided or where
the minor may be found," is not applicable as it refers
to a petition for custody of minors. What Is appllcable
is Section 20 which covers petition for a writ of habeas
corpus involving custody of minors. Considering that the
writ is made enforceable within a judicial region,
petitions for the issuance of the writ of habeas corpus,
whether they be filed under R102 of the Rules of
Court or pursuant to Section 20 of A.M. No. 03-04-04SC, may be fled with any of the proper RTCs within the
judicial region where enforcement thereof is sought.
As regards TM's assertion that the summons
was improperly served, service of summons is not
required in a habeas corpus petition, be it under R102
or A.M. No, 03-04-04-SC. A writ of habeas corpus
plays a role somewhat comparable to a summons, in
ordinary civil actions, in that, by service of said writ,
the court acquires jurisdiction over the person of the
respondent. (See Tujan-Militante v. Cada-Deapera,
28 July 2014).
Q.

What is the period of appeal from a judgment or
final order in a habeas corpus case?

A.

An appeal in habeas corpus cases shall be taken
within 48 hours from notice of the judgment or final
order appealed from. (Sec. 39, B.P. Big 129; S3 R41

"this statoment in Tupan-Mil/ante needs clarification,
Petitions for
habeas corpus in relation to child-custody under Section 20 of A.AM, N, 03-0404.SC as a rule may be fie only with the Family Court, rot just any RTC, within
the judicial region

186

RULE 102
Habeas Corpus

as amended by A.M. No. 01-1-03-SC, effective 15
July 2001). Only a notice of appeal is required to perfect
the appeal. (1 FLORENZ 0. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 303 [4" rev. ed.. 2" printing))
Q.

In a habeas corpus case, the respondent Director
of the Bureau of Corrections received a copy of
the RTC's decision on October 1 at 10:00 am. Up
to when may the Director appeal the decision?

A.

Up to 3 October, even If beyond 10:00 am. Under S1
R22, in computing any perlod of time prescribed or
allowed by the Rules of Court or by order of court, or
by any applicable statute, the day of the act or event
from which the designated period of time begins to
run is to be excluded and the date of performance
included. Hence the 48-hour period starts to run on 2
October. (See Kabigting v. Director of Prisons, G.R.
No. L-15548, 30 October 1962; 1 FLORENZ D
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 303
4"rev. ed., 2" printing)).

under S18 R4t of the 1984 FRules, the appeal period was 48 hours fron

notice of the Judgment, In Tung Chin Hui • Rodrigue2, G.R. 137571, 21
September 2000, the Supreme Court held tat under $3 #41 of the 1997 Rules
which took effect on 1 July 1997, the appeal period for habeas corpus wss '5
days from notice since S18 R4t of the 1984 Rules was not reproduced in tho
1997 Rules. Tung Chin Hi was superseded by A.M. No, 01-1.03-SC (effective
15 Jaly 2001), which reverted to the 48-hour appeal period The ruling in Tung
Chin Hut is arguable since under Sec. 39 0f B.P Blg. 129, the appeal period is
48 hours. The 48-hour appeal porlod applies also to judgments of the Court of
Appeals and Sandiganbayan pursuant to Sec. 39 0l B.P. Blg. 129.

187

RULE ON THE WRIT OF AMPARO
(eff. 24 October 2007)
Q.

What is the writ of amparo?

A.

A remedy available to any person whose right to life,
liberty, and security has been violated or is threatened
with violation by a public official or employee or a
private individual or entity. The writ covers extralegal
killings and enforced disappearances or threats
thereof. (S1, Rule on the Writ of Amparo [RWA]), The
Supreme Court has held that the writ is confined to
cases of extralegal killings and enforced disappearances
or threats thereof. Hence the writ cannot be availed of
by an alien detained by the Bureau of Immigration by
virtue of legal process. (Mison v, Gallegos, 23 June
2015, e.b., Perez, J.)

0.

Conrad is widely known in the neighborhood as a
drug addict. He is also suspected of being a
member of the notorious "Akyat-Condo Gang" that
has previously broken into and looted condominium
units In the area. Retired Army Colonel Sangre
who is known as an anti-terrorism fighter who
disdained human and constitutional rights and
has been nicknamed "terror of Mindanao" - is now
the Head of Security of Capricorn Land Corporation,
the owner and developer of Sagittarius Estates where
a series of robberies has recently taken place.

-

On March 1, 2013, Conrad informed his
mother, Vannie, that uniformed security guards
had invited him for a talk in their office but he
refused to come. Later that day, however, Conrad
appeared to have relented; he was seen walking
into the security office flanked by two security
guards. Nobody saw him leave the office afterwards.
Conrad did not go home that night and was never
188

Rule on the Writ f Amparo

seen again. The following week and after a weeklong search, Vannie feared the worst because of
Col. Sangre's reputation. She thus reported
Conrad's disappearance to the police. When nothing
concrete resulted from the police Investigation,
Vannie - at the advice of counsel - filed a petition
for a writ of amparo to compel Col. Sangre and
the Sagittarius Security Office to produce Conrad
and to hold them liable and responsible for
Conrad's disappearance. Did Vannie's counsel
give the correct legal advice? (13 Poli Bar Q9).
A.

No, Vannie's counsel did not give the correct legal

advice.
The Supreme Court has held that in an amparo
petition, proof of disappearance alone is not enough.
It must also be shown and proved by substantial
evidence that the government or its agents had a
hand in the disappearance or that they failed to exercise
extraordinary diligence in investigating his case. even
If the person sought to be held accountable or
responsible in an amparo petition is a private individual or
entity, still, government involvement in the disappearance
remains an indispensable element. Otherwise the writ
of amparo may not issue.
Here the facts show that it was a private security
agency which was involved and there was no showing
of any direct or indirect government involvement. The
mere fact that nothing concrete came out of the police
investigation after a week is not proof that the police
failed to exercise extraordinary diligence in investigating

the case. (Navia v. Pardico, 19 June 2012, e.b., Del
Castillo, J.).

189

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

Petitioners were complaining to a Cebu Pacific
desk at the airport regarding their lost baggage
when they noticed Ramon Tulfo taking a video of
them. Petitioners approached Ramon Tulfo and a
brawl subsequently ensued in which the Petitioners
got the better of Ramon Tulfo. Days after the
incident, respondents Raffy, Ben, and Erwin Tulfo,
brothers of Mon, aired on their TV program
comments and expletives against Petitioners and
threatened that they will retaliate. Terrified by the
gravity of the threats hurled, Petitioners filed a
petition for the issuance of a writ of amparo against
Respondents before the RTC. Respondents filed
a motion to dismiss arguing that their statements
did not involve any actual threat and that they
were merely expressing their strong sentiments to
defend their brother, Petitioners opposed the motion
saying that a motion to dismiss is a prohibited
motion. May the RTC grant the motion to dismiss?

A.

Yes. The Rule on the Writ of Amparo was intended to
address and, thus, is presently confined to cases involving
extralegal killings and/or enforced disappearances, or
threats thereof, Moreover there must be a showing of
direct or indirect government participation in order for
the Rule to apply,
In this case, it is undisputed that petitioners'
amparo petition before the RTC does not involve any
case of extrajudicial killing and/or enforced disappearance,
or any threats thereof, in the senses above-described.
Their petition is merely anchored on a broad invocation of
respondents' purported violation of their right to life
and security, carried out by private individuals without
any showing of direct or indirect government participation
Thus, it is apparent that their amparo petition falls
outside the purview of A.M. No. 07-9-12-SC and,
perforce, must fail.

190

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

Hence, the RTC, properly exercised its discretion
to motu proprio dismiss the same under this principal
determination, regardless of the filing of a motion to
dismiss. The court, indeed, has the discretion to
determine whether or not it has the authority to grant
the relief in the first place. And when it is already
apparent that the petition falls beyond the purview of
the rule, it has the duty to dismiss the petition so as
not to prejudice any of the parties through prolonged
but futile litigation. (Santiago v. Tulfo, 21 October
2015, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

ls a petition for a writ of amparo available in cases
of incommunicado detention?
Yes,

since

incommunicado detention presents
characteristics of enforced disappearance. "[E forced
disappearances" are "attended by the following
characteristics: an arrest, detention or abduction of a
person by a government official or organized groups
or private individuals acting with the direct or indirect
acquiescence of the government; the refusal of the
State to disclose the fate or whereabouts of the
person concerned or a refusal to acknowledge the
deprivation of liberty which places such persons
outside the protection of law."
Considering that the definition of enforced
disappearances does not make a distinction between
abduction of private citizens or abduction of convicted
national inmates, the remedy of the writ of amparo
may be available even to convicted natlonal lnmates,
as long as the alleged abduction was made for the
purpose of placing the national inmate outside the
protection of the law. (Boratong v. De Lima, e.b., 8
September 2020, Leonen, J.).

191

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Petitioner learned that her estranged husband, an
alleged NPA member, was killed in an encounter
with the military. She went to the funeral home
where her husband's remains were. While there
she was photographed by police officers. She was
subsequently put under surveillance by the police,

who also threatened to arrest her for obstruction
of justice if she did not answer their questions.
She noticed frequent drive-bys by a police car and
noticed that somebody was tailing her. All these
caused her to fear for her and children's safety.
Is petitioner entitled to the privilege of the writ
of amparo?

A.

Yes. The facts show that petitioner and her children
were the subject of surveillance because of their
relationship with a suspected NPA member, creating
a real threat to their life, liberty, and security. Writ
primarily meant to address concerns such as, but
not limited to, extrajudicial killings and enforced
disappearances, or threat thereof. (Sanchez v Daroca,
15 October 2019, e.b., Leonen, J.)

Q.

ls the writ of amparo available if there is a
threatened demolition of a dwelling by virtue of a
final and executory judgment?

A.

No. Enjoining the threatened demolition of a dwelling
by virtue of a final and executory judgment is not
included among the enumeration of rights in S1 RWA,
(Canlas v. Napico Homeowners Association, 5 June
2008, en banc)

0.

ls a writ of amparo available against a barangay
captain's alleged trespass of private property?

A.

No, since this is merely a violation of Petitioner's property
rights. (Sps. Pador v. Arcayan, 12 March 2013)

192

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

Q.

ls a writ of amparo available to an attorney whose
name was included by the Philippine Army in its
Order of Battle list?

A.

No. The inclusion of petitioner's names in the Order of
Battle List does not, by itself, constitute an actual
threat to her right to life, liberty and security as to
warrant the issuance of a writ of amparo. (Ladaga v
Mapagu, 13 November 2012, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

Q.

Where may the petition for a writ of amparo be filed?

A.

It may be filed with the RTC of the place where the
threat, act or omission was committed or any of its
elements occurred, or the Sandiganbayan, Court of
Appeals, Supreme Court or any justice thereof,°

0.

Who may file a petition for issuance of writ of
amparo?

A.

The petition may be filed by the aggrieved party or by
any qualified person or entity in the following order
(IRC)

(1) Immediate family of aggrieved party:

spouse,

children and parents.
(2) Ascendant, descendant, or relative within
degree, in default of 1.

4"

(3) Concerned citizen or organization if no known
immediate family member or relative of the
aggrieved party. (S2 RWA)

vote that the rules provide where the petition for a wnit of amparo is ftea,
not which court hes jurisdiction over a petition for writ of amnparo. The reasor is
that the Supreme Court has no power to lay down rules regarding subject-matte

jurisdiction

193

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the territorial extent of the writ of
amparo's enforceability?

A.

It may be enforced anywhere in the Philippines.

0.

What are the contents of the petition?

A.

The petition shall be signed and verified and shall
allege the following:
a) Personal circumstances of the petitioner.
b) Personal circumstances of the respondent.

c)

The right to life, liberty, and security of the aggrieved
party violated or threatened with violation by the
respondent and how such threat or violation is
commrzed wrr the attendant circumstances :detailed
in supporting affidavits.

d) The investigation conducted, if any, specifying the
names, personal circumstances, and addresses
of the investigating authority or individuals, as well
as the manner and conduct of the investigation,
together with any report.

e) The actions and recourses taken by the petitioner
to determine the fate or whereabouts of the
aggrieve party and the identity of the person
responsible for the threat, act, or omission.
f) The relief prayed for.
Q.

May the President be included as a respondent in
a writ of amparo case solely on the basis of
command responsibility?

A.

No because of the principle of presidential immunity
from suit. (Rubrico v. Macapagal-Arroyo, G.R. No,
183871, 18 February 2010; Burgos v. Macapagal-Arroyo,
22 June 2010)

194

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

0.

A.

In a writ of amparo case, the AFP Chief of Staff
and the PNP Director were included as respondents
not because they were connected with, let alone
behind the abduction and harassment of the
petitioner, but on the theory that as commanders,
they were responsible for the unlawful acts of
their subordinates. May the AFP Chief of Staff and
the PNP director be included as respondents in a
writ of amparo case solely on the basis of command
responsibility?
Yes but not far the purpose of attaching accountability

and responsibility to them for the enforced
disappearance of Lourdes but only to determine the
author who, at the first instance, is accountable for
and has the duty to address the disappearance and
harassments complained of In order to enable the
court to devise remedial measures. (Rubrico v. MacapagalArroyo, G.R. No. 183871, 18 February 2010)
Q.

Should the respondent file a return? If so, within
what period?

A.

The respondent shall file a verified return within 5
working days after service of the writ. The period to
file a return cannot be extended except on highly
meritorious grounds.

0.

What are the contents of the return?

A.

The return together with supporting affidavits shall,
among other things, contain the following: (PAID)
(a) Lawful defenses.

(b) Action taken to determine the fate or whereabouts
of the aggrieved party and to determine the
responsible persons.

195

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(c) All relevant information in respondent's possession
about the threat, act, or omission,
(d) If the respondent is a public official or employee,
the return shall further state the actions that have
been taken or will be taken.

(i) to verify the identity of the aggrieved party,
(ii) to recover and preserve evidence
(i) to identify witnesses and obtain their statements.
(iv) to determine the cause and circumstances of the
death or disappearance.
(v) to identify and arrest responsible persons.

(vi) to hale suspected offenders before court.
A general denial of the allegations of the petition
shall not be allowed.
Q.

In a writ of amparo case, the RTC judge ordered the
respondents to file an answer rather than a return.
Did the judge act with grave abuse of discretion?

A.

Yes. A return in a writ of amparo case is different from
and serves a different function from an answer. Aside
from defences, a return must also allege other information
or matters. (De Lima v. Gatdula, 19 February 2013)

Q.

What are the effects of the failure to file the return?

A.

The effects of the failure to file the return are the
following:
(1) The respondent waives any defense that he may
have had. Under S10 RWA, all defenses shall be
raised in the return; otherwise they shall be
deemed waived.

196

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

(2) The court shall proceed to hear the petition ex
parte. (S12 RWA)
(3) The court may cite for contempt a respondent who
refuses to make a return. (S16 R\WA).
Q.

What are the Interim reliefs available in a writ of
amparo case?

A.

Upon the filing of the petition or at anytime before final
judgment, the court may grant any of the following
reliefs: (PWIT)
(a) TEMPORARY PROTECTION ORDER (TPO)
Upon motion or motu proprio, the court may order
that the aggrieved party and any member of the
immediate family be protected in a government
agency or by an accreditod person or private
institution capable of securing their safety
(b) INSPECTION ORDER (IO). Upon verified motion
and after due hearing, the court may order the
inspection or photographing of property or relevant
object or operation thereon. If the motion is opposed
on the ground of national security or evidentiary
privilege, the court may conduct an in camera hearing.
(c) PRODUCTION ORDER (PO), Upon verified motion
and after due hearing, the court may order
production of designated objects for inspection or
copying. If the motion is opposed on the ground
of national security or evidentiary privilege, the
court may conduct an in camera hearing.

(d) WITNESS PROTECTION ORDER (WPO). Upon
motion or motu proprio, the court may refer witnesses
to the DOJ for admission to the witness protection
program. Witnesses may also be referred to other
government agencies or accredited persons or
private institutions for safekeeping.
197

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

a.

Cleofas and Marciana filed with the Supreme
Court a petition for the issuance of a writ of
amparo with motion for production and Inspection
against the respondent chief of staff and military
officers of the Northern Luzon Command (NOL.COM).
Petitioners alleged that the military was behind
the disappearance of their sons Nicolas and
Heherson. They presented an affidavit of Josephine
who alleged therein that she saw Nicolas and
Heherson inside Camp Servlllano Aquino of the
NOLCOM In Tarlac City. The SC resolved to issue
a writ of amparo and directed the respondents to
make their return before CA Justice Edgardo
Sundiam, In their return, the respondents denied
having custody of Nicolas and Heherson or having
any knowledge as to their whereabouts. After
hearing, the Court of Appeals issued an order
stating that petitioners were not able to establish
that respondents were directly or indirectly connected
with the disappearance of Nicolas and Heherson.
The Court; of Appeals stated that the respondents'
witnesses were able to Impeach the testimony of
Josephine by showing that she had a penchant
for lying. Nonetheless the Court of Appeals in the
interest of human rights and justice, granted
reliefs to the petitioners in the form of inspection
of Camp S. Aquino and ordering concerned units
of the NOLCOM to make thorough Investigation
as to the disappearance. Was it proper for the
Court of Appeals to grant the reliefs of inspection
and investigation?

A.

No. While the RWA provides for the interim reliefs of
TpO, IO and PO, these provisional reliefs are intended
to assist the court before it arrives at a judicious
determination of the amparo petition. For the appellate
court, in the present case, to still order the inspection
of the military camps and order the army units to

198

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

conduct an investigation into the disappearance of
Nicolas and Heherson after it absolved petitioners is
not in order. The reliefs granted by the appellate court
to respondents are not in sync with a finding that
petitioners could not be held accountable for the
disappearance of the victims. (Yano v. Sanchez, G.R.
No, 186640, 11 February 2010 (e.b.])
Q.

Petitioner filed a petition for issuance of writ of
amparo against the respondent military officers.
He alleges that the military was coercing or
intimidating him to be a double agent for the military
against the NPA. The CA issued a judgment granting
the privilege of the writ of amparo. In his motion
for reconsideration, the Petitioner asks that the
court issue a temporary restraining order (TPO) to
stop the military from coming near him. ts the
issuance of a TPO proper?

A.

No. Interim reliefs can only be granted before a final
adjudication of the case is made. In any case, it must
be underscored that the privilege of the writ of amparo,
once granted, necessarily entails the protection of the
aggrieved party Thus, since petitioner was granted
the privilege of the writ of amparo, there is no need to
Issue a TPO independently of the former. The order
restricting respondents from going near Rodriguez is
subsumed under the privilege of the writ. (Rodriguez
v. Macapagal4Arroyo, 15 November 2011, e.b., Sereno, J.)

Q.

Raymund and Reynaldo were extrajudicially abducted
and detained by the military and then subjected to
torture. From time to time, Raymund and Reynaldo
were given medical treatment. Eventually, they
were able to escape. They flied a Petition for Writ
of Amparo against the military officers responsible
for their abduction and torture. In their petition,
Raymund and Reynaldo prayed that respondents

199

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

furnish them with all official and unofficial reports
of the investigation undertaken in connection with
their case and that respondents cause to be produced
all medical reports and records regarding their

treatment.
Respondents argue that the production order
sought by Raymund and Reynaldo partakes of tho
characteristics of a search warrant. Thus, they
claim that the requisites for the issuance of a
search warrant must be complied with prior to the
grant of the production order, namely: (1) the
application must be under oath or affirmation; (2)

the search warrant must particularly describe the
place to be searched and the things to be seized;
(3) there exists probable cause with one specific
offense; and (4) the probable cause must be
personally determined by the judge after examination
under oath or affirmation of the complainant and
the witnesses he may produce. Is the Respondents'
argument meritorious?
A.

No. The production order under the Amparo Rule
should not be confused with a search warrant for law
enforcement under Article III, Section 2 of the 1987
Constitution. This Constitutional provision is a protection
of the people from the unreasonable intrusion of the
government, not a protection of the government from
the demand of the people, such as respondents.
Instead, the amparo production order may be likened
to the production of documents or things under R27
which may be employed to compel production of
documents, letters, and objects which are material
and not privileged. (Secretary of National Defense v
Manalo, 7 October 2008, Pun0, C.J.)

200

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

Q.

What is the procedure for hearing?

A.

The hearing on the petition shall be summary. The
court may, however, hold a preliminary conference to
simplify issues and obtain stipulations and admissions
from the parties. (S13 RWA)

0.

What are the prohibited pleadings or papers in a
writ of amparo case?

A.

The following pleadings, motions, or papers are
prohibited
1) Motion to dismiss.
2) Motion for extension of time to file opposition,

affidavit, position paper and other pleadings.

3) Dilatory motion for postponement.
4) Motion for a bill of particulars
5) Counterclaim or cross-claim.

6) Third-party complaint.

7) Reply.
8) Motion to declare respondent in default.
9) Intervention.

10) Memorandum.
11) Motion for reconsideration of interlocutory orders
or interim relief orders.
12) Certiorari, mandamus, or prohibition against any
interlocutory order

201

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Note that:
»

Unlike in the Rule on Summary Procedure,
motions to dismiss on whatever ground are
prohibited

Counterclaims, even if compulsory, are prohibited
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure only
permissive counterclaims are not allowed.
+

Apparently, a petition for relief is not prohibited.
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure it is.
Motions for reconsideration of interlocutory orders
are prohibited. Motions for Reconsideration of
final orders or judgments are allowed. This is the

reverse of what the Rules on Summary Procedure
provide.

Q.

In 2009, Christina gave birth to Baby Julian. Sun
and Moon Home for Children shouldered all the
hospital and medical expenses. On 13 August 2009,

Christina voluntarily surrendered Baby Julian by
way of a Deed of Voluntary Commitment to the DSWD.

Subsequently, the biological father Marcelino

suffered a heart attack and died without knowing
about the birth of his son. Thereafter, during the
wake, Christina disclosed to Marcelino's family

that she and the deceased had a son that she
gave up for adoption due to financial distress and

initial embarrassment. Marcelino's family was
taken aback by the revelation and sympathized
with Christina. After the emotional revelation, they
vowed to holp her recover and raise the baby.
In November 2009, the DSWD, through Secretary

Cabral issued a certificate declaring Baby Julian

as "Legally Available for Adoption." A local
matching conference was held. Baby Julian was

202

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

"matched" with the spouses Medina of the
Kaisahang Bahay Foundation. Supervised trial custody
then commenced.
In May 2010, Christina who had changed her
mind about the adoption, wrote a letter to the
DSWD asking for the suspenslon of Baby Julian's
adoption proceedings. She also said she wantod
her family back together,
The DSWD stated that the certificate declaring
Baby Julian legally avallable for adoption had
attained finality on November 13, 2009, or three
months after Christina signed the Deed of Voluntary
Commitment which terminated her parental
authority and effectively made Baby Julian a ward
of the State. Christina filed a petition for a writ of
amparo against respondent DWSD and its officers. In
her petition, Christina accused respondents of
"blackmailing" her into surrendering custody of
her child to the DSWD utilizing what she claims to
be an invalid certificate of availability for adoption
which respondents allegedly used as basis to
misrepresent that all legal requisites for adoption
of the minor child had been complied with.
Christina argued that by making these
misrepresentations, the respondents had acted
beyond the scope of their legal authority thereby
causing the enforced disappearance of the said
child and depriving her of her custodial rights and
parental authority over him.
ls a petition for a writ of amparo available in
order for a biological mother to recover custody
of child from the DSWD?

203

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

No. In this case, Christina alleged that the respondent
DSWD officers caused her "enforced separation" from

Baby Julian and that their action amounted to an
"enforced disappearance" within the context of the
Amparo rule. Contrary to her position, however, the

respondent DSWD officers never concealed Baby
Julian's whereabouts. In fact, Christina obtained a
copy of the DSWD's 28 May 2010 Memorandum
explicitly stating that Baby Julian was in the custody

of the Medina Spouses when she filed her petition
before the RTC. Besides, she even admitted in her
petition for review on certiorari that the respondent
DSWD officers presented Baby Julian before the RTC
during the hearing held in the afternoon of August 5,
2010. There is therefore, no "enforced disappearance"
as used in the context of the Amparo rule as the third
and fourth elements are missing.
Christina's directly accusing the respondents of
forcibly separating her from her child and placing the
latter up for adoption, supposedly without complying
with the necessary legal requisites to qualify the child
for adoption, clearly indicates that she is not searching for
a lost child but asserting her parental authority over
the child and contesting custody over him.

Since it is extant from the pleadings filed that
what is involved is the issue of child custody and the
exercise of parental rights over a child, who, for all
intents and purposes, has been legally considered a
ward of the State, the Amparo rule cannot be properly
applied. (Caram v. Segui, 5 August 2014)

Q

What is the period and mode of appeal from a
judgment in a Writ of Amparo case? To what

court is the appeal taken?

204

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

A.

Any party may appeal from the final judgment or order

to the Supreme Court under R45. The period of
appeal shall be 5 working days from notice of the
adverse Judgment. (S19 RWA) While not expressly
provided for in the Rules, in case a motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial is filed and
denied, the 5-working-day period should be computed
from notice of the order denying the motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial. (See S25
RWA), The appeal may raise questions of fact or law
or both. (S19 RWA)
Q.

What is the quantum of proof needed for the
parties to establish their claims?

A,

Substantial evidence or that amount of relevant
evidence which a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support a conclusion. (S17 RWA; S5 R133)

0.

ls hearsay admissible in writ of amparo cases?

A.

Yes. Technical rules of evidence are not strictly
observed in writ of amparo case. The rules of
evidence are reduced to the most basic test of reason
- ie., to the relevance of the evidence to the issue at
hand and its consistency with all other pieces of
adduced evidence. Thus, even hearsay evidence can
be admitted if it satisfies this basic minimum test. The
courts should exercise flexibility in the consideration
of evidence, including hearsay evidence, in extrajudciat
killings and enforced disappearance cases. (Razon v
Tagitis, 3 December 2009, Brion, J).

Q.

What is the standard of_ diligence required of the
respondent In the performance of a duty?

A.

Ordinary diligence if the respondent is a private
individual or entity and extraordinary diligence if the
respondent is a public official or employee, The
respondent public official or employee cannot invoke

205

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the presumption that official duty has been regularly
performed to evade responsibility or liability. (S17 RWA),
Q.

Does the failure on the part of the public official to
prove that he observed extraordinary diligence
result in the automatic grant of the privilege of the
amparo writ?

A

No. The failure to establish that the public official
observed extraordinary diligence in the performance

of duty does not result in the automatic grant of the
privilege of the amparo writ It does not relieve the
petitioner from establishing his or her claim by
substantial evidence. The omission or inaction on the

part of the public official provides, however, some
basis for the petitioner to move ano for the court to
grant certain interim reliefs. (Yano v. Sanchez, G.R.
No. 186640, 11 February 2010 [e.b.J).
Q.

Does the Rule on the Writ of Amparo preclude the
filing of a separate criminal, civil, or administrative
action?

A.

No. (S22\

Q.

What is the effect when a criminal action arising
out of the act or omission subject of the Amparo
case has been commenced?

A.

PRECLUSION. In such a case no separate petition
for the writ shall be filed. The reliefs under the writ
shall be available by motion in the criminal case.
CONSOLIDATION, When the criminal action is
filed subsequent to the fling of the petition for the writ,
the latter shall be consolidated with the criminal action.
When a criminal action and a separate civil
action are filed subsequent to a petition for the writ, the
petition shall be consolidated with the criminal action

206

Rule on the Writ of Amparo

After consolidation, the procedure under this
Rule shall continue to apply to the disposition of the
reliefs in the petition. (S23).
0.

Father Robert Reyes was among those arrested in
connection with the Manila Peninsula Hotel siege
on 30 November 2007, Inquest proceedings for
rebellion were conducted. Per the DIL.G's request,
DOJ Secretary Raul Gonzalez issued a Hold
Departure Order (HDO) against Fr. Reyes. Subsequently
the DOJ panel of Prosecutors filed an information
for rebellion against Fr. Reyes and other accused
before RTC of Makati City, Branch 150.
Fr. Reyes filed a motion for judicial determination
of probable cause. The judge dismissed the case
for lack of probable cause. The DOJ filed a motion
for reconsideration of the order of dismissal. Fr.
Reyes then filed a petition for a writ of amparo
before the Court of Appeals contending that the
HDO violated his right to travel. During the pendency
of the amparo case, the RTC issued an order
denying the DOJ's motion for reconsideration for
lack of merit. May the writ of amparo issue?

A.

No Section 22 of the Rule on the Writ of Amparo
provides that when a criminal action has been
commenced, no separate petition for the writ shall be
filed and that the reliefs under the writ shall be
available by motion in the criminal case. Pursuant to
Section 22, Fr. Reyes should have filed with the RTC-

" 1is opined that the provisions of the Rule on preclusion (822) and
consolidation (S23) should not apply to the indepenaent crvll action for damages
and other relief for the violation of the civli lbertles mentioned in Art. 32 of the
Civil Code, Otherwise a proceoural rule would be undermining a substantive
fight under the Civil Code.

207

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Makati a motion to lift the HDO. Despite the denial of
the DO.J's MR of the dismissal of the case, the trial
court has not lost control over the criminal case which
is still pending before it. By virtue of its residual
power, the court a quo retains the authority to
entertain incidents in the instant case to the exclusion
of even the Supreme Court. (Reyes v. Gonzalez, 3
December 2009 [e.b.])
Q.

Are decisions in writ of amparo and writ of habeas
corpus cases immediately executory?

A

Yes. There Is no need to file a motion far execution
for an amparo or haboas corpus decision. Hence in a
case, the CA erred in ruling that its directive
to immediately release Sherlyn, Karen and Merino
was not automatically executory and that petitioners
should have filed a motion for writ of execution. That
would defeat the very purpose of having summary
proceedings in amparo petitions. Summary proceedings
are immediately executory without prejudice to appeal.
(Boac • Cadapan, 31 May 2011, Carpio Morales, J).

208

RULE ON THE WRIT OF HABEAS DATA
(elf. 2 February 2008)
0.

What is the writ of habeas data?

A.

A remedy available to any person whose right to
privacy in life, liberty or security is violated or
threatened by an unlawful act or omission of a public
official or employee, or of a private individual or entity
engaged jn the gathering gr storing_ pf data or

information regarding the person, family, home, and
correspondence of the aggrieved party. (S1, Rule on
the Writ of Habeas Data [RHD]

Q.

May a petition for writ of habeas data be filed
against the President of the Philippines?

A.

No. The case should be dismissed because of
presidential immunity from suit. (De Lima v. Duterte,
15 October 2019, e.b., Bersamin, C.J.)

0.

Police Officer Guapo visited his live-in partner
Ganda's house but inadvertently left his camera
there. Ganda got hold of the camera and discovered
sex videos of Guapo with another woman. Ganda
confronted Guapo and the two had a fight. She
showed the videos to NAPOLCOM officers and
threatened to file an administrative case against
Guapo using the videos as evidence. Guapo filed
a petition for habeas data against Ganda with the
RTC which after hearing granted the privilege of
the writ by ordering the implementing officer to turn
over the subject videos to Guapo and enjoined
Ganda from further reproducing the videos. Ganda
appealed to SC. Was the grant of the privilege of
the writ of habeas data proper?

209

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME H
A.

No. A petition for habeas data must adequately show
that there exists a nexus between the right to privacy
on the one hand, and the right to life, liberty, or
security, on the other. Here Guapo's petition failed to
allege such nexus. He also failed to show by
substantial evidence that the violation of his right to
privacy over the videos would violate his rights to life,
liberty, or security. (Lee v. Ilagan, 8 October 2014,
Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

0.

Petitioner was a mayor of a town in llocos Norte.
In December 2009, former President Gloria Macapagal-

Arroyo issued Administrative Order No. 275,
"Creating an Independent Commission to Address
the Alleged Existence of Private Armies in the
Country." The body, which was later on referred
to as the Zenharosa Commission, was formed to
investigate the existence of private army groups
(PAGs) in the country with a view to eliminating
them before the 10 May 2010 elections and
dismantling them permanently in the future.
Gamboa alleged that the PNP-locos Norte
conducted a series of surveillance operations
against her and her aides, and classified her as
someone who keeps a PAG. Purportedly without
the benefit of data verification, PNP-Ilocos Norte
forwarded the information gathered on her to the
Zefarosa Commission, thereby causing her inclusion
in the Report's enumeration of individuals
maintaining PAGs.
Contending that her right to privacy was
violated and her reputation maligned and destroyed,
Gamboa filed a Petition for the issuance of a writ
of habeas data against respondents in their
capacities as officials of the PNP-locos Norte.
Should Gamboa be granted the privilege of the
writ of habeas data?

210

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

A.

No, The right to informational privacy, as a specific
component of the right to privacy, may yield to an
overriding legitimate state interest, in this case, the
interest of the State in dismantling private armed groups.
(Gamboa v. Chan, 24 July 2012, e.b., Sereno, J.)

Q.

Where may the petition for a writ of habeas data
be filed?

A.

It may be filed with the RTC where petitioner or
respondent resides or that which has jurisdiction over
the place where the data or information is gathered or
stored, at petitioner's option. It may also be filed with
the Sandiganbayan, Court of Appeals, and the Supreme
Court if the petition concerns public data files of
government offices. (S3 RHD)

O.

What is the territorial extent of the writ of habeas
data's enforceability?

A,

Anywhere in the Philippines.

Q.

Who may file a petition for a writ of habeas data?

A.

The aggrieved party. However, in cases of extralegal
killings and enforced disappearances, the petition
may be filed by a member of the aggrieved party's
immediate family or in default thereof by a relative
within the 4" civil degree, (S2 RHD)

Q.

What are the contents of the petition for issuance
of a writ of habeas data?

A.

A verified petition for a writ of habeas data should
contain the:

"gate that unlike in habeas carpus and writ ot amparo cases, there is no
provision al+owing the filing of tine pettion with a member of these collegial
courts The reason is the lesser exigency of a petition for a writ of habeas at

211

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME

(a) Personal circumstances of the petitioner and
respondent;
(b) Manner of violation of the right to privacy and how it
affects the right to life, liberty or secunty of the
aggrieved party;

(c) Actions and recourses taken by petitioner to
secure the data or information;
(d) Location of the files, the government office, and
the person in charge or in control of the data or
information, if known;

(e) The reliefs prayed for, which may include the
updating, rectification, suppression or destruction
of the database or information or files kept by the
respondent; or in case of threats, an order

enjoining the act complained of; and
(f) Other relevant reliefs as may be just and equitable
(S6 RHD).
Q.

Should the respondent file a return? If so, within
what period?

A.

The respondent shall file a verified return together
with supporting affidavits within 5 working days after
service of the writ. The period to file a return may be
reasonably extended by the court for Justifiable
reasons. (S10 RHD).

Q.

What are the contents of the retumn?

A,

The return together with supporting affidavits shall,
among other things, contain the following:
(a) Lawful defenses.
(b) In case of a respondent in charge or In control of
the data or information subject of the petition:

212

Rule on the Wrt of Habeas Data

(i) disclosure of the data, the nature of such data,
and the purpose for its collection;

(ii) the steps taken by the respondent to ensure the
security and confidentiality of the data;

(iii) the currency and accuracy of the data held; and
(c) Other allegations relevant to the resolution of the
proceeding. A general denial of the allegations in the
petition shall not be allowed. (S10 RHD)
Q.

What are the effects of the failure to file the
return?

A.

The effects of the failure to file the return are the
following:
(1) The court shall proceed to hear the petition ex
parte granting the petitioner such relief as the
petition may warrant unless the court in its discretion
requires the petitioner to submit evidence.
(S14 RHD).
(2) The court may cite for contempt a respondent who
refuses to make a return. (S11 RHD).

Q.

What is the procedure for hearing?

A.

The hearing on the petition shall be summary. The
court may, however, hold a preliminary conference to
simplify issues and obtain stipulations and admissions
from the parties. The hearing shall be from day to day
until completed and shall be given the same priority
as petitions for habeas corpus. (S13 RWA).

•

What are the prohibited pleadings or papers in a
writ of habeas data case?

213

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A,

The following pleadings, motions, or papers are
prohibited;

1) Motion to dismiss.
2) Motion for extension of time to file return, opposition,
affidavit, position paper and other pleadings.

3) Dilatory motion for postponement.
4) Motion for a bill of particulars

5) Counterclaim or cross-claim.
6) Third-party complaint.

7) Reply
8) Motion to declare respondent in default.
9) Intervention.
10) Memorandum.

11) Motion for reconsideration of interlocutory orders
or interim relief orders.
12) Certiorari, mandamus, or prohibition against any
interlocutory order

Note that:

-» Unlike in the Rule on Summary Procedure,
motions to dismiss on whatever ground are prohibited.
All defenses or objections should be raised in the
return which must be filed within 5 working days from
service of the writ. The period may be reasonably
extended by the court for justifiable reasons. If no
return filed, the court shall hear the petition ex parte.
Court may also cite the respondent who refuses to
make a return in contempt.

214

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

- Counterclaims, even if compulsory, are
prohibited. Under the Rule on Summary Procedure
only permissive counterclaims are not allowed.

- Apparently, a petition for relief is not prohibited.
Under the Rule on Summary Procedure it is.
Motions for reconsideration of interlocutory
orders are prohibited. Motions for Reconsideration of
final orders or judgments are allowed. This is the reverse
of what the Rules on Summary Procedure provide
Q.

What is the period and mode of appeal from a
judgment In a Writ of Habeas Data case? To what
court is the appeal taken?

A.

Any party may appeal from the final judgment or order
to the Supreme Court under R45. The period of
appeal shall be 5 working days from notice of the
adverse judgment. (S19 RHD) While not expressly
provided for in the Rules, in case a motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial is filed and
denied, the 5-working-day period should be computed
from notice of the order denying the motion for
reconsideration or motion for new trial. (824 RHD)
The appeal may raise questions of fact or law or both.

(S19 RHD)
Q.

What is the quantum of proof of the allegations in
a writ of habeas data case?

A.

Substantial evidence or that amount of relevant
evidence which a reasonable mind might accept as

adequate to support a conclusion. (S16 RHD; S5 R133),
Q.

When may a hearing in chambers be conducted?

A.

A hearing in chambers (in camera) may be conducted
where the respondent invokes the defense that the
release of the data or information in question shall
215

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

compromise national security or state secrets, Or

when the data or information cannot be divulged to
the public due to its nature or privileged character.
(S12 RHD).
Q.

What is the effect of the filing of a criminal action?

A.

When a criminal action has been commenced, no
separate petition for the writ shall be filed. The reliefs
under the writ shall be available by motion in the
criminal case. (S22 RHD).

When a criminal action is filed after the filing of
the petition for the writ, the latter shall be consolidated
with the criminal action,

When a criminal action and a separate civil
action are filed subsequent to a petition for a writ of
amparo, the latter shall be consolidated with the criminal
action. ($21 RHD).
Q.

Azenith, the cashier of Temptation Investments,
Inc, (Temptation, Inc.) with principal offices in
Cebu City, is equally hated and loved by her coemployees because she extends cash advances
or "vales " to her colleagues whom she likes. One
morning, Azenith discovers an anonymous letter
inserted under the door of her office threatening
to kill her. Azenith promptly reports the matter to
her superior Joshua, who thereupon conducts an
internal investigation to verify the said threat.
Claiming that the threat is real, Temptation, Inc.
opts to transfer Azenith to its Palawan Office, a
move she resists in view of the company's refusal
to disclose the results of its investigation.

M ie opined that the provisions of the Rule on preclusion (S22) and
consolidation (s2t) should not apply to the independent civil action for damages
and other relief for the violation of the clvh ibertes mentioned in Art. 32 of the
Civil Code. Otherwise a procedural rule would be undermining a substantive right
under the Civil Codie
216

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

Decrying the move as a virtual deprivation of
her employment, Azenith files a petition for the
issuance of a writ of habeas data before the
Regional Trial Court (RTC) to enjoin Temptation,
Inc. from transferring her on the ground that the
company's refusal to provide her with a copy of
the investigation results compromises her right to
life, liberty and privacy. Resolve the petition.
Explain. (10 Bar a20).
A.

The petition should be denied.
Under the Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data, the
writ is available in cases where a person's right to
privacy in life, liberty, or security is violated or
threatened by an unlawful act of an entity engaged in
the gathering, collecting, or storing of data or
information regarding the person, family, home, or
correspondence of the aggrieved party.

The writs of amparo and habeas data will NOT
issue to protect purely property or commercial concerns
nor when the grounds invoked in support of the
petitions therefor are vague or doubtful. Employment
constitutes a property right under the context of the
due process clause of the Constitution. It is evident
that respondent's reservations on the real reasons for
her transfer - a legitimate concern respecting the
tems and «onditions of one's employment - are what
prompted her to adopt the extraordinary remedy of
habeas data. Jurisdiction over such concerns is
inarguably lodged by law with the NLRC and the
Labor Arbiters. (Meralco v. Gopez-Lim, 5 October
2010, e.b., Carpio-Morales, J.)

217

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Julia and Julienne, both minors, were graduating
high school students at St. Theresa's College (STC),

Cebu City. Sometime in January 2012, while
changing into their swimsuits for a beach party
they were about to attend, Julia and Julienne,
along with several others, took digital pictures of

themselves clad only in their undergarments.
These pictures were then uploaded by Angela on
her Facebook profile.

Back at the school, Mylene Escudero, a
computer teacher at STC's high school department,
learned from her students that some seniors at
STC posted pictures online, depicting themselves
from the waist up, dressed only in brassieres.
Escudero then asked her students if they knew
who the girls in the photos were. In turn, they
readily identified Julia, Julienne, and Chloe,
among others.
Using STC's computers, Escudero's students
logged in to their respective personal Facebook
accounts and showed her photos of the identified
students. What is more, Escudero's students
claimed that there were times when access to or
the availability of the identified students' photos
was not confined to the girls' Facebook friends,
but were, In fact, viewable by any Facebook user.
Upon discovery, Escudero reported the matter
and, through one of her student's Facebook page,
showed the photos to Kristine Rose Tigol (Tigol),
STC's Discipline-in-Charge, for appropriate action.
Thereafter, following an investigation, STC found
the identified students to have deported themselves
in a manner proscribed by the school's Student
Handbook and barred them from participating in
the graduation rites.

218

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

Despite the issuance of the TRO by a court,
STC, nevertheless, barred the sanctioned students
from participating in the graduation rites, arguing
that, on the date of the commencement exercises,
its adverted motion for reconsideration on the
issuance of the TRO remained unresolved.
Thereafter, petitioners filed before the RT a
Petition for the Issuance of a Writ of Habeas Data
alleging that their children's right to informational
privacy was violated and praying that (a) a writ of
habeas data be issued; (b) respondents be
ordered to surrender and deposit with the court
all soft and printed copies of the subject data
before or at the preliminary hearing; and (c) after
trial, judgment be rendered declaring all information,
data, and digital images accessed, saved or
stored, reproduced, spread and used, to have
been illegally obtained in violation of the children's
right to privacy.

The RTC issued the writ of habeas data and
directed the Respondents to file their return. In
their return, the Respondents raised the following
defenses:
a)

Habeas data does lie against STC, It not being
an entity engaged in the gathering, collecting
or storing of data or information regarding the
person, family, home and correspondence of
the aggrieved party.

b) There can be no violation of their right to
privacy as there is no reasonable expectation
of privacy on Facebook.
Decide the case.

219

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

The petition for habeas data should not be granted.
a) To be sure, nothing in the Rule would suggest that
the habeas data protection shall be available only
against abuses of a person or entity engaged in
the business of gathering, storing, and collecting
of data.

Section 1 of the Rule on the Writ of Habeas
Data, when taken in its proper context, as a whole,
irresistibly conveys the idea that habeas data is a
protection against unlawful acts or omissions of public
officials and of private individuals or entities engaged
in gathering, collecting, or storing data about the
aggrieved party and his or her correspondences, or
about his or her family. Such individual or entity need
not be in the business of collecting or storing data.
To "engage" in something is different from undertaking
a business endeavour. To engage" means "to do or
take part in something." It does not necessarily mean
that the activity must be done in pursuit of a business.
What matters is that the person or entity must be
gathering, collecting or storing said data or
information about the aggrieved party or his or her
family. Whether such undertaking carries the element
of regularity, as when one pursues a business, and is
In the nature of a personal endeavour, for any other
reason or even for no reason at all, is immaterial and
such will not prevent the writ from getting to said
person or entity.
To agree with respondents' above argument,
would mean unduly limiting the reach of the writ to a
very small group, ie., private persons and entities
whose business is data gathering and storage, and in
the process decreasing the effectiveness of the writ
as an instrument designed to protect a right which is
easily violated in view cf rapid advancements in the

220

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

information and communications technology-a right
which a great majority of the users of technology
themselves are not capable of protecting.
b) Nonetheless, there is no right to informational
privacy on photos posted on Facebook. It is well
to note that not one of petitioners disputed
Escudero's sworn account that her students, who
are the minors' Facebook "friends," showed her
the photos using their own Facebook accounts.
This only goes to show that no speclal means to
be able to view the allegedly private posts were
ever resorted to by Escudero's students, and that
it is reasonable to assume, therefore, that the
photos were, in reality, viewable either by (1) their
Facebook friends, or (2) by the public at large.
Considering that the default setting for Facebook
posts is "Public," it can be surmised that the photographs
in question were viewable to everyone on Facebook,
absent any proof that petitioners' children positively
limited the disclosure of the photograph. If such were
the case, they cannot invoke the protection attached
to the right to informational privacy.
That the photos are viewable by "friends only"
does not necessarily bolster the petitioners' contention, In
this regard, the cyber community is agreed that the
digital irages under this setting still remain to be
outside the confines of the zones of privacy in view of
the sheer number of Facebook "friends" and the
facility in which photos can be shared even to those
who are not "friends."
It is well to emphasize at this point that setting a
post's or profile detail's privacy to "Friends" is no
assurance that it can no longer be viewed by another
user who is not Facebook friends with the source of
the content. The user's own Facebook friend can
221

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

share said content or tag his or her own Facebook
friend thereto, regardless of whether the user tagged
by the latter is Facebook friends or not with the
former. Also, when the post is shared or when a
person Is tagged, the respective Facebook friends of
the person who shared the post or who was tagged
can view the post, the privacy setting of which was set
at "Friends." (Vivares v. St, Theresa's College, 29
September 2014, Velasco, J.)
Q.

Distinguish the petitions for writ of habeas
corpus, writ of amparo, and wrlt of habeas data:

HABEAS CORPUS
Governing

rule
Availabie
to whom

Rule 103

Person
illegally
deprived of
liberty or from
whom rightful
custody of
any person is
withheld

AMPARO

HABEAS DATA

Rule on the Writ
of Amparo

Rule on the Wr'

Person whose
right to life,
liberty, anod
security has been
violated or
threatened with
violation by public
or private
individual or
entity. Extends to
extralegal killings
or enforced
disappearances
or threats thereof

Person whose
right to privacy in
life, liberty or
security is
violated or
threatened by an
unlawful act or
omission of a
public or private
individual or

,
of Habeas Data

entity engaged in

the gathering or
storinj of data or

information
regarding the
person, family,
home, and
correspondence
of the
aggrieved party.

l
222

Rule on the Writ of Habeas Data

ow+satotl SC,CA,SB
where filed
RTC in the
judicial region
where writ
sought to be
enforced

MTC (In the
absence of
alt RTC
Judges in the
province
or city)

I

SC, CA, SB

I

RTC where
threat, act or
omission
committed or
where any of its
elements
occurred.

SC, CA, SB
(public data files
of govt offices)
RTC where
petitioner or
respondent
resides or that
which has
jurisdiction over
the place where
the data or
information is
gathered or
stored, al

petitioner's

tion.
Who may

Aggrieved
party or any
person on his
bahalf.

file

Aggrieved party
or by following in
the order
mentioned
Immediate family

relative within 4
degree, and
concerned citizen
or oranization.
Docket
fees
�tentof
orceability

P500 (S7[9l
R141)

I

Exempt

Aggrieved party.
In cases of

EKED, immediate
famly, or, in
default thereof,
relative within 4"
degree.

P50O (S7lg]

R141), indigent
.etitioner exempt

SCCASB:
Anywhere

Anywhere

Anywhere

RTCIMTC:
wWin judicial

region
Interim
reliefs

N.A.

Available (PWIT)

N.A.

Filing of
return

Return to be
made on date
and lime

Return must be
filed within 5
working das

Return must be
filed within 5
workindaS

I

223

-

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Appeal

specified in
writ (S6 & 8

from service of
the wnt. No

from service of
the writ.

R102)

extension except
on highly

Reasonable
extension for

meritorious
]Justifiable reason
rounds.
----�
--;-------

Notice of
appeal within
48 hours

R45 w/in 5
working days
rom notice

R45 w/in 5

working days
from notice

from notice
Primacy of
criminal
action

Not subject to

Subject to

primacy of

primacy of
criminal action
($22 & 23 RWA)

criminal

action. (Art.
32(4]. CMI

Subject to
primacy of
criminal action

($21 & 22 RHD)

Code;

Quantum

Preponderan

Substantial

of proof

ce of
evidence (S1

evidence (S17
RWA)

R133

224

Substantial
evidence (S16
RHD)

I

RULE 103. CHANGE OF NAME
Q.

What is the statutory basis of Rule 103?7

A.

Article 376 of the Civil Code which provides that "[n]o
person can change his name and surname without
judicial authority."

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction over
petitions for change of name?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec, 19(7) 0f B.P, BIg. 129

Q.

What is the venue for the special proceeding for
change of name?

A.

With the Regional Trial Court of the place where the
petitioner resides.

0.

Can an alien flle a petition for change of name?

A.

Yes provided he is domiciled in the Philippines. (Ong
Han Tin v. Republic, G.R. No. L-20997, 27 April 1967).

0.

What is the name that may be changed under
Rule 103?7

A.

Rule 103 covers principally the change of surname
and middle name. For change of first name and/or
nickname, the principal governing law is R.A. No
9048 which authorizes the local civil registrar or the
consul general to effect such change.

Q.

May a change of name he effected administratively?

A.

The general rule is that a change of name may only

be effected by a judicial order. (Article 412, Civil
Code). However under R.A. No. 9048 (approved 22
March 2001), a change of first name or nickname
may be done administratively under the procedure set
forth therein.
225

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
Q.

Differentiate change of name from correction of
entry of name.

A.

In order to differentiate change of name from
correction of entry of name, it must be first understood
that the real or official name of a person is that which
is given in the civil register, not the name by which he
was baptized in his church or by which he has been

known in the community. (San Roque v. Republic, G.R.
L-22035, 30 April 1968). Hence any petition which
seeks to change the name recorded in the civil registry is
a petition for change of name governed by R103. On
the other hand, mere correction of typographical or clerical
errors in the entry of the name which are obvious to
the understanding are governed by R108. (Republic
v. Mercadere, GR. No. 186027, 8 December 2010;
Q.

In June 2005 Merlyn L. Mercadera sought before
the Local Civil Registrar of Dipolog City the
correction of her name as it appeared in the birth
certificate from Marilyn L. Mercadera to Merlyn L.
Mercadera. The LCR of Dipolog City however
refused to act on the correction unless a court
order was obtained since he was not yet equipped
with a permanent appointment. Merlyn L. Mercadera
thus filed a petition under Rule 108 with the RTC
of Dipolog City to correct her name appearing in
the birth certificate as Marilyn L, Mercadera to
Merlyn L. Mercadera, the name she has been
using since childhood and In her official and
school records. The RTC granted the petition. On
appeal, the OSG asked that the RTC's decision be
set aside as the proper remedy that should have
been availed of is Rule 103 for change of name
and not Rule 108 for correction of entries. Is the
OSG correct?

226

RULE 103
Change of Name

A.

No. If what a petitioner seeks to do is simply to correct

a typographical or clerical error in the entry of her
name, then the procedure to be followed is Rule 108
and not Rule 103. On the other hand, Rule 103 is
based on change of name which is not simply a
correction of a typographical or clerical error, as
where the name is dishonorable or is indicative of
former alienage. Here the correction of a patently
misspelled name (Marilyn to Merlyn) is proper under
Rule 108, The RTC did not allow Merlyn Mercadera to
change her name What it did allow was the correction

of her misspelled given name which she has been
using ever since she could remember. (Republic v.
Mercadera, G.R. No. 186027, 8 December 2010).
Q.

Give examples of clerical or typographical errors
in name whose correction ls proper under R108.

A
1) To change first name of Sincio" to Sencio."

2) "Beatriz Labayo/Beatriz Labayu" to "Emperatriz
Labayo."
3) "Midael C. Mazon" to "Michael C. Mazon." (Republic
v. Mercadera, supra).
Q.

In November 2000, Lorena Sali filed a petition for
correction under R108 of her first name from
"Dorothy" to "Lorena." She alleges that her name
was erroneously recorded as "Dorothy" rather
than "Lorena," that "Lorena" is the name she has
been using for as long as she can remember and
that she Is known to the community as such. The
petition was granted upon compliance by Sall with
the mandatory requirements for an adversarial
proceeding. On appeal, the Republic contends
that the judgment should be set aside
227

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

the proper remedy that should have been availed
of was R103 and not Rt08 since the change

from "Dorothy" to "Lorena" is not a mere clerical
or typographical error but involves a substantial
change.

a) Should the judgment be set aside?
b) Would your answer be the same If the petition
was filed in May 2001?

A.
a) No, the judgment should not be set aside. Sali's

petition is not for a change of name as contemplated
correction
of

under

R103

but

entries

under

for

R108. What she seeks is the correction of clerical
errors which were committed in the recording of
her name and birth date. The Supreme Court has
held that not all alterations allowed in one's name
are confined under R103 and that corrections for
clerical errors may be set right under R108. The
evidence presented by Sali show that, since birth,
she has been using the name "Lorena." Thus, it is
apparent that she never had any intention to
change her name. What she seeks is simply the
removal of the clerical fault or error in her first
name, and to set aright the same to conform to
the name she grew up with. (Republic v. Sali, 3
April 2017, Peralta, 4,)3

b)

Yes. In such case, the petition, insofar as it prayed
for the change of Sall's first name, was not within
the RTC's primary jurisdiction but of the LCR
pursuant to R.A. No. 9048, It was improper

ts opined that the Republic was correct and that R103 was the
appropnate remedy since the change of name from "Dorothy" to "Lorena was
substantial, Nonetheless the result reached is correct sinoe the mandatory
requirements for an adversarial proceeding wet complied with by Sali. (See

Republic • Marcadera, supra.

228

RULE 103

Change of Name

because

the

remedy

should

have

been

administrative, l.e., filing of the petition with the

local civil registrar concerned. For failure to
exhaust administrative remodies, the RTC should
have dismissed the petition to correct Sali's first
name. (/bi.)°
Q.

What are the contents of the petition for change of
name?

A.

The petition shall be signed and verified by the person
desiring to change his name, or some other person in
his behalf, and shall set forth:

1) That the petitioner has been a bona fide resident
of the province where the petition is filed for at
least 3 years prior to the date of such filing;
2) The cause for which the change of the petitioner's
name is sought; and
3) The name asked for, (S2 R103)
Q.

What are the valld grounds for a change of name?

A.

The following are valid grounds for a change of name
(DR DACUL):
a)

When the name is ridiculous, dishonorable, or
extremely difficult to write or pronounce;

b) When the change results as a legal consequence,
as in legitimation;
c) When the change will avoid confusion;

re

reasoning of the Court is somewhat confusing. The Count held that
pior to the effactwity of R.A. 9048, the proper proceeding was under FR108 and
not RID3. However when citing RR.A. No. 9048, the Court did not say that the
petition should be brought as a petition for correction of clerical or typographical
orror but stated that it should be brought as a petition for change of first name

229

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

d) When the petitioner has been using a name for
school purposes and his school records are in
such name, then his name in the civil registry
may be changed to the name that he has been
using in school;
e) A sincere desire to adopt a Filipino name to erase
signs of former glienage.
Q.

Are the above grounds exclusive?

A.

No. The matter of whether to grant a petition for
change of name is left to the sound discretion of the
Court. The petition should be granted where there is
proper and reasonable cause and where there is no
showing that the petition was motivated by fraudulent

intent or that the change of surname will prejudice
public interest. (Oshita v. Republic, G.R. No. L-21180,
31 March 1967)
Q,

If the petition is sufficient in form and substance,
what is the next step to be done by the court?

A.

The count, by an order reciting the purpose of the
petition, shall fix a date and place for the hearing
thereof, and shall direct that a copy of the order be
published before the hearing at least once a week for
3 consecutive weeks in some newspaper of general
circulation published in the province. The date set for
the hearing shall not: be within 30 days prior to an
election nor within 4 months after the last publication
of the notice. (S3 R103)

0.

ls the Singaporean practice of not carrying a
middle name enough to justify a child born of a
Singaporean father and a Filipino mother, but
whose birth was registered in the Philippines, to
change his name by dropping the middle name
(surname of the mother)?
230

RULE 103

Change of Name

A.

No. To justify a change of middle name, the petitioner
must not only show proper and compelling reason
therefor but also that he will be prejudiced by the use
of his true name Convenience for the child shall not
suffice. How such change of name would make his
Integration into Singaporean society easier and convenient
is not clearly established. That the continued use of
his middle name would cause confusion and difficulty
does not constitute proper and reasonable cause to
drop it from his registered complete name.

In addition, petitioner is only a minor. Considering
the nebulous foundation on which his petition for
change of name ls based, it is best that the matter of

change of his name be left to his judgment and
discretion when he reaches the age of majority. As
he is of tender age, he may not yet understand and
appreciate the value of the change of his name and
granting of the same at this point may just prejudice
him in his rights under our laws. (In Re Petition for
Change of Name and/or Correction of Entry in the
Civil Registry of Julian Lin Carulasan Wang, G.R. No.
159966, 30 March 2005)

0.

An adoptee filed a petition under R103 to change
his surname from Santos (his adopters' surname)
to Revlla (surname of his biological father). The
grounds invoked are the petitioner's sincere and
genuine desire to associate himself to Bong
Revilla, Jr. and to the Revillas and to show his
true and genuine love to his biological father. May
the petition be granted?

A.

No. The use of lhe adopter's surname by the adopted
child is both an obligation and a right. An adoptee's
desire to adopt his biological father's surname is not a
compelling reason for change of surname. The
petitioner's sincere and genuine desire to associate
himself to Bong Revilla Jr. and to the Revillas, and "to
231

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

show his true and genuine love to his biological

father" are not cogent reasons for the change of
surname. The Court distinguished the instant case
from Rpublic • Wong, 209 SCRA 189 (1992), where
there was a compelling reason because the petitioner
alleged and proved that he was severely prejudiced
by the use of the surname "Wong," which isolated him
from friends and relatives since he is a Muslim Filipino
residing in a Muslim community. (Santos v. Republic,
5 May 2021, Caguioa, .).
Q.

Lua Ong is a Chinese, Lua being the surname and

Ong the first name. He bore a son, The midwife
who acted as the Informant in the birth certificate
thought that Ong was the surname. Not given any
Information as to what the child's first name
should be, she just reported "Baby Ong" as the
name. The child was however known In the community
and used the name "Lua An Jok." The father filed
a petition to change the name In the birth
certificate from "Baby Ong" to "Lua An Jok." The
caption of the petition as set forth in the order of
hearing which was published once a week for 3
consecutive weeks did not set forth Lua An Jok,"
the name asked for, although this was contained
in the body of the petition. The court granted
the petition.
a) ls the petition covered by change of name under
R103 or correction of entries under R108?
b)
A.

May the judgment of the court granting the
petition be sot aside?

a) It is covered by change of name under R103. The
child's real name was "Baby Ong." A person's real or
official name is that which is given in the civil registry.
Since the petition seeks to change this, it is a change
of name governed by R103.
232

RULE 103
Change of Name

b) Yes. Publication of the order of hearing under S3
R103 is a Jurisdictional requirement and a
defective publication will not confer jurisdiction
upon the court. Such publication must give the
correct information as to (1) name or names of
the applicant; (2) the cause for the change of
name; and (3) the new name sought to be adopted.
The title or caption must include the applicant's
real name and his aliases or other names, and
should recite the name sought to be adopted.

Here the caption of the petition as published in
the order did not contain the name sought, that Is,
"Lua An Jok." The fact that it was mentioned in the
body of the petition is of no moment. A petition for
change of name is a proceeding in rem and hence the
publication should include the correct information in
order to vest jurisdiction upon the court. (Republic v.
Tanada, G.R. No. L-31563, 29 November 1971).

0.

Pernito, also known in the community as
Peregrino, filed a petition for change of name to
Pedro. The name Peregrino appeared in the body
of the petition but not in the caption, When the
petition was published, the caption and the body
of the petition were merely lifted verbatim, so that
as publlshed, the petition's caption still did not
contain Peregrino as the petitioner's alias. The
government lawyer filed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that, notwithstanding publication for
the requisite number of times, the court did not
acquire jurisdiction over the petition because
petitioner's allas (Peregrino) did not appear in the
published caption, The court denied the motion to
dismiss with the ruling that there was substantial
compliance with the law and that the omission of

233

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
the alias in the caption may be deemed de minimis
because the alias was clearly set forth in the
petition itself, Was the court correct in denying
the motion to dismiss? Explain. (92 Bar Q10).

A.

No, the court was not correct in denying the motion
to dismiss.

The Supreme Court has held that the caption of
the petition as published must contain the applicant's
real name, and his aliases or other names, and
should recite the name sought to be adopted. The fact
that the aliases were mentioned in the body of the
petition itself is of no moment.
Here the caption of the petition as published did
not contain the alias Peregrino. This was a jurisdictional
defect and hence the court did not acqure jurisdiction

over the petition. (Republic v. Tanada, 29 November
1971; Go v. Republic, 77 SCRA 65)

Note: There is an imperfection in the drafting of
the question. What is required to be published is the
order of the hearing not the petition.
Q.

The petitioner who has been using his mother's
surname Ballaho since childhood wanted to
change his surname in his birth certificate from
Alanis (his father's surname} to Ballaho. He invokes
avoidance of confusion as his ground considering
that he had been using the surname Ballaho and
had been known in his community by such
surname since childhood. This was denied by the
trial court on the ground that it would "even
create more confusion because it could trigger
much deeper inquiries regarding his parentage
and/or paternity." Was the denial proper?

234

RULE 103
Change of Name

A.

No. Article 364 of the Civil Code provides that
legitimate children shall principally use the surname of
their father. "Principally" does not mean exclusively."

A legitimate child is not precluded from using his or
her mother's surname if there is a proper and reasonable
cause for it. Here, the proper and reasonable cause
was to avoid confusion since the child was using the
surname of the mother since childhood. Hence, the
trial judge erred when he in effect interpreted
"principally" in Article 364 as "exclusively" based on
his reasoning that for a legitimate child to use the

surname of his mother would "even create more confusion
because it could trigger much deeper irquiries
regarding his parentage and/or paternity." (Alanis v
Court of Appeals, 11 November 2020, Leonen, 4.
Q.

Should the local civil registrar be impleaded In a
petition for change of name under Rule 103?

A.

No. Unlike Rule 108, the local civil registrar need not be
impleaded in a petition for change of name. However
a copy of the judgment or order shall be furnished the
civil registrar of the city or municipality where the
court issuing the same is situated, who shall forthwith

enter the same in the civil register. (S6 R103).
Q.

Is there a need for a petition under R103 to
implead all persons who have or claim an interest
which would be affected by the change of name?

A

sober reading of Alanis shows that il does not oonfer unfettered
entitlement to a legitimate child to use the surname of his pr her mother Article
384 of te Ct Code, which provides that legitimate children sal principally use
the surnarne of the father, is sti good law unless repealed by Congress. lt
cannot pe repealed by a Supreme Count decision. A perusal of Atfon v
Republic (cited in Alanis) shows that while a legitimate child is not precluded from
using his or her mother's surname, there must be s proper and reasonable cause
tor it. In both Allon and Alanis, the proper and reasonable cause was to avoid
contusion since the child was using the surname ot the mother since childhood

235

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. While S3 R108 requires that the petitioner
implead all persons who have or claim an interest
which would be affected by the petition, there is no
such requirement in R103. Thus, failure to implead
the biological and adoptive father does not render the
proceedings under R103 void. (Santos v. Republic, 5
May 2021, Caguioa, 4.).

Q.

Pfiled a petition for change of name with the RTC
which the latter granted. The Republic appealed
from the judgment granting the petition by fling a
notice of appeal with the RTC. Before the CA, P
moved to dismiss the Republic's appeal on the
ground that a record on appeal is required in
appeals in special proceedings. Should the Republic's
appeal be dismissed?

A.

No. Appeal from the RTC's order granting a petition
for change of name is perfected by filing a notice of
appeal only. A record on appeal is not required since
the case does not involve multiple or separate appeals
where the trial court needs to retain the original record.
(Republic v. Nishina, G.R. No. 186053, 15 November
2010, Carpio Morales, J.).

Q.

May a petition for adoption include a petition for
change of the adoptee's first name or is the change
of name limited only to the adoptee's surname?

A.

The petition for adoption may include a petition for
change of the adoptee's first name. There are no
restrictions in this regard under S10 of the Rules on
Adoption. In fact S10(c) states that in case the petition
also prays for change of name, the title or caption
must contain the registered name of the child and the
full name by which the child is to be known

236

RULE 108. CANCELLATION OR
CORRECTION OF ENTRIES
IN THE CIVIL REGISTRY
Q.

What is the statutory basis of Rule 108?

A.

The statutory basis of Rule 108 is Article 412 of the
Civil Code which provides that "[nlo entry in a civil
register shall be changed or corrected, without a

judicial order."
Q.

Who may file a petition for cancellation or
correction of entries in the civil registry?

A,

Any person interested in an act, event, order or
decree concerning the civil status of persons which
has been recorded in the civil register, may file a
verified petition for the cancellation or correction of
any entry relating thereto. (S1 R108).

Q.

What is the correction of entries covered under
R108?

A.,

R108 covers principally correction of entries which are

not merely clerical or typographical errors. For correction
of clerical or typographical errors, the principal
governing law is R.A. No. 9048 which authorizes the
local civil registrar or the consul general to effect such
corrections.
In Republic v. Cagandahan, G.R. No. 166676, 12
September 2008, it was held that R.A. No. 9048
removed from the ambit of R108 correction of clerical
or typographical errors and that R108 applies only to
substantial changes or corrections of entries in the
civil register. It is opined that it is more precise to state
that R108 is still available for correction of clerical or
typographical errors, albeit as a secondary recourse
237

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Can a petition be filed under R108 to correct the
erroneous entry in birth certificate that petitioner's
parents were married?

A.

Yes. Even substantial errors in a civil registry may be
corrected and the true facts established under R108
provided the parties aggrieved by the error avail
themselves of the appropriate adversary proceeding.
A petition seeking a substantial correction of an entry
in a civil register must implead as parties to the
proceedings not only the local civil registrar, as
petitioner did in the dismissed petition for correction of
entries, but also all persons who have or claim any
interest which would be affected by the correction.
This is required by S3, R108. Thus, in his new
petition, petitioner should at least implead his father
and mother as parties since the substantial correction
he is seeking will also affect them, (Onde v. Local
Civil Registrar, 10 September 2014).

Q.

May correction of entries be done administratively?

A.

Yes. Clerical or typographical errors may be corrected
administratively by the city or municipal civil registrar
or the consul general pursuant to the procedure set
forth in R.A. No. 9048.

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction over
petitions under R108?

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sec. 44(e) of the Judiciary Act
of 1948, which provides that the Court of First
Instance (now RTC) shall have original and exclusive
jurisdiction over special proceedings not otherwise
provided for by law. This provision was not repealed
by B.P. Blg. 129.

23B

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

0.

Where is the venue of the petition?

A.

Venue lies in the place where the corresponding civil
registry is located. (S1 R108)

Q.

Petitioner married a Canadian man in Davao City.

They flew to Canada where the petitioner had a
daughter with her husband. Her birth was recorded
in the national office of the Philippine Statistics
Authority (PSA) in Manila. However her year of
birth was erroneously indicated as 2016 rather
than 2015. Petitioner filed a petition under R108
with the RTC of Davao City. The court motu
proprio dismissed the petition on ground of "lack
of Jurisdiction" stating that the petition should
have been filed in RTC of Manila where the
corresponding civil registry is located. Was the
RTC's d!smissal order correct?
A.

Yes. Given that Rule 108 pertains to a special
proceeding, the specific provisions stated thereunder,
particularly on venue under S1, must be observed in
order to vest the court with jurisdiction.
Moreover the petitioner did not implead the local
civil registrar who is an indispensable party. The
inescapable consequence of the failure to implead the
civil registrar is that the RTC will not acquire jurisdiction
over the case. (Fox v. Philippine Statistics Authority,
6 March 2019, Reyes, J..3°

0.

Petitioner was born in 1989 in Sabah, Malaysia. It
was only in 2008 that her mother reported her
birth to the Philippine Statistics Authority in Quezon
City. However her birth year was erroneously

t is submitted that the ruling is not in accordane with the law Fiest S1
R18 is a provision on venue not jurisdiction It is auomatic that a court cannot
dismiss a case molu proprio on the ground of inproper venue. Its also wee'l-settle¢
that falure to irpiead an indispensable party is not a ground for dismissal
239

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

recorded as 1980 instead of 1989.

She filed a

petition under R108 with the RTC of Davao City,
where she resides, to correct her year of birth in
her report of birth. The RTC motu proprio dismissed
the petition on the ground of improper venue
stating that under S1 R108 the petition should
have been filed with the RTC of Quezon City. Was
the dismissal correct?
A.

No. Venue is procedural, not jurisdictional, and hence,
may be waived. It was erroneous for the RTC to motu
proprio dismiss the petition before it on the ground of
improper venue. Since convenience is the raison
d'etre of the rules on venue, and as it was established
that Davao City is the residence of petitioner, and as
further pointed out by the OSG, PSA has a field office
located in Davao City, it is the most convenient for
the parties.
Moreover, it is well-settled that courts may not
motu proprio dismiss the case on the ground of
improper venue. Without any objection at the earliest
opportunity, as in a motion to dismiss or in the answer, it
is deemed waived. The OSG did not register any
objection to the venue of the petition. (Cabrera v.
Philippine Statistics Authority, 3 June 2019, PerlasBernabe, 4.)."

Q.

Who shall be made parties to the proceeding?

A.

When cancellation or correction of an entry in the civil
register is sought, the civil registrar and all persons
who have or claim any interest which would be affected
thereby shall be made parties to the proceeding.

(83 R108)

it is submitted that Cabrera, as oppose to Fox, is the correct application
of the law

240

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of

Entries in the Civil Registry
Q.

Upon the filing of the petition, what shall the court
do?

A.

The court shall, by an order, fix the time and place for

the hearing of the petition and cause reasonable
notice thereof to be given to the persons named in the
petition. The order shall be published once a week for
3 consecutive weeks (1 x 3) in a newspaper of
general circulation in the province.

0.

How many sets of notices are required under
R108?

A.

A reading of S3 & 4 R108 readily shows that R108
mandates two sets of notices to different potential
oppositors. The first notice is that given to the persons
"named_in the ;etition made by impleading them and
giving them personal notice. The second (which is
through publication) is that given to other persons not
named in the petition but nonetheless may be
considered interested or affected parties, such as
creditors. (Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo, G.R. No.
189476, 2 February 2011)

Q.

What is the effect if the civil registrar and affected
persons are not impleaded in the petition?

A.

The failure to implead the civil registrar and the
parties who would naturally and legally be affected by
the grant of the petition would render the proceedings
and the judgment void. Non-impleading, however, as
respondent of one who is inadvertently left out or is
not established to be known by the petitioner to be
affected by the grant of the petition would not nullify
the proceedings and judgment as they are deemed
notified through publication. (Republic v. CosetengMagpayo, G.R. No. 189476, 2 February 2011)

241

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

•

B files a petition for cancellation of the birth
certificate of her daughter R on the ground of the
falsified material entries therein made by B's
husband as the informant, The RTC sets the case
for hearing and directs the publication of the
order once a week for 3 consecutive weeks in a

newspaper of general circulation. Summons was
served on the Civil Registrar but there was no
appearance during the hearing. The RTC granted
the petition, R filed a petition for annulment of
judgment before the Court of Appeals, saying that
she was not notified of the petition and hence, the
decision was issued in violation of due process.
B opposed saying that the publication of the court
order was sufficient compliance with due process
Rule. (07 Bar Q7a).

A.

The judgment of the RTC should be annulled.
The failure to implead the parties who would
naturally and legally be affected by the grant of tne
petition would render the proceedings and the judgment
void. (Republic v. Coseteng-Magpayo, GR. N0. 189476,
2 February 2011)
Here R would naturally and legally be affected by
the grant of the petition since it is her birth certificate
which would be amended Hence the judgment against

her is null and void since she was not impleaded
and notified.
Q.

Respondent who is an employee of the Bureau of
Customs filed a petition under R108 to correct the
year of his birth from 1952 to 1956. Respondent
impleaded the LCR and the Bureau of Customs In
his petition. The RTC issued an order granting the
petition. Subsequently Respondent filed a request
with the Civil Service Commission for the correction

242

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

of his birth year in the service record from 1952 to
1956 attaching the RTC decision. The CSC denied
the request. Was the denial proper?

A.

Yes. The Civil Service Commission is an indispensable
party in a R108 petition to correct Respondent's year
of birth from 1952 to 1956 since that would affect a
government employee's service records. Here, t

would mean that the Respondent would have an
additional four years before reaching his compulsory
retirement age. Hence, the RTC decision was null and

void for failure to implead an indispensable party.
(Civil Service Commission v, Rasuman, 17 June
2019, Peralta, J.)
Q.

May an opposition be filed against the petition? If

so, by whom and when?
A.

The civil registrar and any person having or claiming
any interest under the entry whose cancellation or
correction is sought may, within 15 days from notice
of the petition, or from the last date of publication of
such notice, file his opposition thereto. (S5 R108)

Q.

After hearing, what action may the court take on
the petition?

A,

The court may either dismiss the petition or issue an
order granting the cancellation or correction prayed
for. In either case, a certified true copy of the
judgment shall be served upon the civil registrar
concerned who shall annotate the same in his record.

Q.

Helen is the daughter of Eliza, a Filipina, and Tony,
a Chinese, who is married to another woman living
in China. Her birth certificate indicates that Helen
is the legitimate child of Tony and Eliza and that
she is a Chinese cltizen.

243

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Helen wants her birth certificate corrected
by changing her filiation from "legitimate" to
"illegitimate" and her citizenship from "Chinese"
to "Filipino" because her parents were not married.

What petition should Helen file and what
procedural requirements must be observed?
Explain. (05 Bar Q11).

A.

Helen should file a petition for correction of entries in
the civil registry under Rule 108 of the Rules of Court.

Under the Law on Special Proceedings a petition
for correction of entries in the civil registry pursuant
to Rule 108 is available to correct entries regarding
the petltioner's status or filiation and citizenship
or nationality.
The procedural requirements that must be observed
are the following:
1) The petition should be verified and should implead
the local civil registrar and the parties who have
an interest which would be affected by the cancelatiorn
or correction, in this case, Helen's parents.
2)

The petition should be filed with the RTC of the
place where the corresponding civil registry is located.

3) The notice of hearing should be published once a
week for three consecutive weeks In a newspaper
of general circulation and personal notice should
be sent to the parents as they have a known
interest which would be affected by the petition.
Q.

In a petition filed with RTC under R108 and dated
13 February 2009, Virgel sought the correction of
entries in his birth certificate as follows: (a) his
gender, from "FEMALE" to "MALE;" (b) his first

244

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

name, from "VIRGIE" to "VIRGEL;" and (c) his month
and date of birth from "no entry" to "FEBRUARY
25, 1976. The RTC granted the petition. On appeal,
the Republic, through the Office of the Solicitor
General (0SG) argued that the change of Virgel's
name from Virgie should have been made through
a proceeding under R103, and not R108. This
argument was premised on the assumption that
the summary procedure under R108 is confined to
the correction of clerical or Innocuous errors,
which excludes one's name or date of birth. Since
the petition lodged with the RTC was not filed
pursuant to R103, the Republic asserted that the
trial court did not acquire jurisdiction over the
case. ls the Republic's argument correct?

A.

No, The Republic incorrectly argued that the petition
for correction under R108 is limited to changes in
entries containing harmless and innocuous errors,
The cited cases in the petition were already superseded
by much later Jurisprudence.
Most importantly, with the enactment of R.A. No.
9048 in 2001, the local civil registrars, or the Consul
General as the case may be, are now authorized to
correct clerical or typographical errors in the civil
registry, or make changes in the first name or nickname,
without need of a judicial order. This law provided an
administrative recourse for the correction of clerical or
typographical errors, essentially leaving the substantial
corrections in the civil registry to R108. (Republic v.
Tipay, 14 February 2018, Reyes, 4.).3

re correction of the first name from "Virgie" to "Vergel" is actualiy a
clerical or typographical error which should have been filed witn the LCFR
pursuant t R.A, No. 9048 (8ff. 22 Aprl 2001). This point was not discussed by
the Supreme Court since the Republic failed to raise the objection of lack of
primary jurisdiction.

245

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Respondent Julian Edward Emerson Coseteng
Magpayo is the son of Fulvio Magpayo and Anna
Dominique Marquez-Lim Coseteng. Claiming that
his parents were not legally married, Respondent
filed with the RTC of Quezon City (where he
resides) a petition under R103 to change his name
as appearing in the civil registry of Makati to
Julian Edward Emerson Marquez-Lim Coseteng.
In support of his petition, Respondent submitted a
certification from the NSO that his mother's name
does not appear in the national indices of marriage.

The RTC granted the petition. The local civil
registrar was not impleaded but copies of the
petition, orders, and the decision were served on

the LCR. Was the grant of the petition proper?
A.

No. The change being sought in Respondent's petition
goes so far as to affect his legal status in relation to
his parents. It has the effect of changing his status
from legitimate to Illegitimate. Hence R108 applies.
Under R108 the petition must be filed in the RTC of
the province where the corresponding civil registry is
located which in this case is Makati. The petition was
however filed in Quezon City where Respondent resides.
Also neither the LCR or the Respondent's father
and mother were impleaded in violation of S3 RR108

which requires that the civil registrar and all persons
who have or claim any interest which would be affected
thereby shall be made parties to the proceeding. The
service of a copy of the petition and its annexes upon
the LCR did not cure the defect, (Republic v.
Coseteng-Magpayo, G.R. No. 189476, 2 February
2011, Carpio Morales, J.)
Q.

Dr. Norma

Lugsanay Uy filed a petition for

correction of entries under Rule 108 to correct her
name from Anita Sy to Norma Lugsanay, her
status from "legitimate" to "illegitimate" and her

246

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

citizenship from "Chinese" to "Filipino," The order
of hearing was duly published. The LCR was
impleaded but the petitioner's parents and siblings
were not. Judgment was rendered granting the
petition. The Republic argued that the judgment was
null and void for failure to lmplead indispensable
parties. Is the Republic's argument correct?
A.

Yes. The petitioner's parents and siblings should have
been impleaded as they would be naturally and
directly affected by the petition, Publication would not
be sufficient notice to them, Since the indispensable
parties were not impleaded, the judgment was void.
(Republic v. Uy, 12 August 2013)

0.

After the death of her husband Pablo Braza, Cristina
came to know that Lucille Titular was introducing
Patrick Alvin as her and Pablo's son. Inquiry
revealed that the child's birth certificate states
that he was legitimated by subsequent marriage
between Pablo and Lucille and the birth certificate
indicates his name as Patrick Alvin Titular Braza.
Contending that Patrick could not have been
legitimated by the supposed marriage between
Lucille and Pablo, said marriage being bigamous
on account of the then valid and subsisting
marriage between Ma, Cristina and Pablo, Cristina
and her children filed with the RTC a petition to
correct the entries in the birth record of Patrick.
In their petition, they prayed for (1) the correction
of the entries in Patrick's birth record with respect
to his legitimation, the name of the father and his
acknowledgment, and the use of the last name
"Braza"; 2) a directive to Leon, Cecilia and Lucille,
all surnamed Titular, as guardians of the minor
Patrick, to submit Patrick to DNA testing to
determine his paternity and filiation; and 3) the

247

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
declaration of nullity of the legitimation of Patrick
as stated in his birth certificate and, for this
purpose, the declaration of the marriage of Lucille
and Pablo as bigamous. The respondents filed a
motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. Should
the motion to dismiss be granted?

A.

Yes. In a special proceeding for correction of entry
under Rule 108 the trial court has no jurisdiction to
nullify marriages and rule on legitimacy and fliation,
Petitioners' insistence that the main cause of action is
for the correction of Patrick's birth records and that
the rest of the prayers are merely incidental thereto is
untenable. The petitioners' cause of action Is actually

to seek the declaration of Pablo and Lucille's marriage as
void for being bigamous and impugn Patrick's legitimacy
which causes of action are governed not by Rule 108
but by AM. No. 02-11-10-SC which took effect on March
15, 2003, and Art. 171 of the Family Code, respectively.
Hence, the petition should be filed in a Family Court
as expressly provided in said Code. (Braza v. City
Civil Registrar of Himamaylan City, 4 December 2009)
Q.

Gerbert ls a former Filipino who acquired Canadian
citizenship. He went to the Philippines and married
Daisylyn in Pasig City. Due to work commitments,
he had to return to Canada. Shocked by Daisylyn's
affair with another man, he divorced her In
Canada. Later, Gerbert found another Filipina to
love. Desirous of marrying her, he went to the
Pasig City Civil Registry Office and registered the
Canadian divorce decree.
a)

Was the recording of the Canadian divorce
decree lawful?

248

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

A.
No. While the law requires the entry of the
divorce decree in the civil registry, the law and the
submission of the decree by themselves do not ipso
facto authorize the decree's registration. The law
should be read in relation with the requirement of a
judicial recognition of the foreign judgment before it
can be given res judicata effect. In the context of the

present case, no judicial order as yet exists recognizing
the foreign divorce decree. Thus, the Pasig City Civil
Registry Office acted without authority of law when it
annotated the Canadian divorce decree on Gerbert
and Daisylyn's marriage certificate, on the strength
alone of the foreign decree presented by Gerbert.

',

b)

Gerbert filed with the RTC of Laoag City a
petition for judicial recognition of the foreign
divorce decree. The RTC rendered decision
dismissing the petition on the ground that
only the Filipino spouse can invoke the provisions
of the 2" paragraph of Article 26 of the Family
Code. Was the judge's decision correct?

A.
No. While the judge was correct in saying that
the 2" paragraph of Article 26 bestows no rights upon
an alien, that would not lead to the conclusion that a
foreigner cannot file a petition for recognition of a
foreign divorce decree. Direct involvement or being
the subject of the foreign judgment is sufficient to
clothe a party with the requisite interest to institute an
action before our courts for the recognition of the
foreign judgment. In a divorce situation the divorce
obtained by an alien abroad may be recognized in the
Philippines, provided the divorce is valid according to
his or her national law.

249

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

c)

Assuming that the RTC renders a decision
recognizing the Canadian divorce decree,
would that by itself already authorize the
cancellation of entry In the Civil Registry?

A.
No. The recognition that an RTC may extend to

the foreign divorce decree does not, by itself,
authorize the cancellation of the entry in the civil
registry. A petition for recognition of a foreign judgment
is not the proper proceeding for the cancellation of
entries In lhe civil registry. The proper proceeding is

that provided for in R108, Rule 108 of the Rules of
Court sets in detail the jurisdictional and procedural
requirements that must be complied with before a
judgment, authorizing the cancellation or correction,
may be annotated in the civil registry.

d)

It is required that two separate proceedings for
the registration of the Canadian divorce
decree - - one for recognition of the foreign
decree and another specifically for cancellation
of entry under R108 -- be brought?

A.
No. The recognition of the foreign divorce decree

may be made in a R108 proceeding itself, as the
object of special proceedings is precisely to establish
the status or right of a party or a particular fact
Moreover, R108 can serve as the appropriate adversarial
proceeding by which the applicability of the foreign
judgment can be measured and tested in terms of
jurisdictional infirmities, want of notice to the party,
collusion, fraud, or clear mistake of law or fact
(Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas, 11 August 2010, Brion, J.)
ghough not explicitly stated in the decision, the record ng of the divorce
decree would in effect resut in the cancellation of the entry in the civil registry
regarding the marriage between Gerbert and Dalsyiyn

250

RULE 108

Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry
Q.

Ted, married to Annie, went to Canada to work.
Five years later, Ted became a naturalized
Canadian citizen. He returned to the Philippines to
convince Annie to settle in Canada, Unfortunately,
Ted discovered that Annie and his friend Louie
were having an affair. Deeply hurt, Ted returned to
Canada and filed a petition for divorce which was
granted. In December 2013, Ted decided to marry
his childhood friend Corazon in the Philippines. In
preparation for the wedding, Ted went to the
Local Civil Registry of Quezon City where his
marriage contract with Annie was registered, He
asked the Civil Register to annotate the decree of
divorce on his marriage contract with Annie. However,
he was advised by the National Statistics Office
(NSO) to file a petition for judicial recognition of
the decree of divorce in the Philippines.
Is it necessary for Ted to file a petition for
judicial recognition of the decree of divorce he
obtained in Canada before he can contract a second
marriage in the Philippines? (14 Civil Bar 024).

A.

Yes. The Supreme Court has held that before a
foreign divorce decree dissolving a marriage contracted
in the Philippines can be given effect, a petition for
judicial recognition of the foreign divorce decree
should be first filed. (Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas, 11 August
2010), Hence a court judgment recognizing the
Canadian divorce decree is necessary in order to give
effect to the decree dissolving the marriage between
Ted and Annie and to allow Ted to contract a second
marriage in the Philippines.

Q.

Hades, an American citizen, through a dating
website, got acquainted with Persephone, a Filipina.
Hades came to the Philippines and proceeded to
Baguio City where Persephone resides. Hades
and Persephone contracted marriage, solemnized
251

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

by the Metropolitan Trial Court judge of Makati
City. After the wedding, Hades flew back to
California, United States of America, to wind up
his business affairs. On his return to the Philippines,
Hades discovered that Persephone had an illicit
affair with Phanes. Immediately, Hades returned
to the United States and was able to obtain a valid
divorce decree from the Superior Court of the
County of San Mateo, California, a court of competent
jurisdiction against Persephone. Hades desires to
marry Hestia, also a Filipina, whom he met at
Baccus Grill in Pasay City.

a) As Hades' lawyer, what petition should you file
in order that your client can avoid prosecution
for bigamy if he desires to marry Hestia?
b) In what court should you file the petition?

c) 0xx (15 Bar Q9).
A.
a)

As Hade's lawyer, I would file a petition for
cancellation of entry of marriage under Rule 108

with prayer for recognition of foreign divorce judgment.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that a foreign divorce decree must first be
recognized before it can be given effect. The Supreme
Court stated that the recognition may be prayed for in
the petition for cancellation of the marriage entry under
Rule 108. (Corpuz v. Sto. Tomas, 628 SCRA 266)
b) I would file the petition in the regional trial court of
Makati City, where the corresponding civil registry
is located. (Section 1 of Rule 108).

252

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

Q.

Petitioner Fujiki ls a Japanese national who married
respondent Maria Paz Marinay in the Philippines
in 2004, The marriage did not sit well with
petitioner's parents. Thus, Fujiki could not bring
his wife to Japan where he resides. Eventually,

they lost contact with each other. In 2008, Marinay
met another Japanese, Maekara, Without the first
marriage being dissolved, Marinay and Maekara
were married in 2008 in Quezon City, Philippines.
Maekara brought Marinay to Japan. However,
Marinay allegedly suffered physical abuse from
Maekara. She left Maekara and started to contact
Fujiki. Fujiki and Marinay met in Japan and they
were able to reestablish their relationship. In 2010,
Fujiki helped Marinay obtain a judgment from a
family court in Japan which declared the marriage
between Marinay and Maekara void on the ground
of bigamy. In 2011, Fujiki filed a petition In the
RTC of Pasay City entitled: "Judicial Recognition
of Foreign Judgment (or Decree of Absolute
Nullity of Marriage)." Fujlki prayed that (1) the
Japanese Family Court judgment be recognized;
(2) that the bigamous marriage between Marinay
and Maekara be declared void ab initio; and (3) for
the RTC to direct the LCR of Quezon City to
annotate the Japanese Family Court judgment on
the Certificate of Marriage between Marinay and
Maekara and to endorse such annotation to the
Office of the Administrator and Civil Registrar
General in the NSO.

A few days after the filing of the petition, the
RTC immediately issued an Order dismissing the
petition based on Braza v. The City Civil Registrar
of Himamaylan City, Negros Occidental (607
SCRA 638 [2009]) wherein the SC ruled that "[ijn a

253

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

special proceeding for correction of entry under
Rule 108, the trial court has no jurisdiction to nullify
marriages x x x." Was the Pasay City RTC's
dismissal of the petition correct?

A.

Since the recognition of a foreign judgment only
requires proof of fact of the judgment, it may be made
in a special proceeding for cancellation or correction
of entries in the civil registry under Rule 108 of the
Rules of Court. In Corpuz • Sto. Tomas (628 SCRA
266 [2010]) this Court declared that "[t]he recognition
of the foreign divorce decree may be made in a R108
proceeding itself, as tho object of special proceedings
(such as that in Rule 108 of the Rules of Court) is
precisely to establish the status or tight of a party or a
articular fact."

Braza is not applicable because Braza does not
involve the recognition of a foreign judgment nullifying
a bigamous marriage where one of the parties is a
citizen of the foreign country To be sure, a petition for
correction or cancellation of an entry in the civil
registry cannot substitute for an action to invalidate a
marriage. A direct action is necessary to prevent
circumvention of the substantive and procedural
safeguards of marriage under the Family Code,
However, this rule does not apply in a petition for
correction or cancellation of a civil registry entry based on
the recognition of a foreign judgment annulling a
marriage where one of the parties is a citizen of the
foreign country. There Is no circumvention of the
substantive and procedural safeguards of marriage
under Philippine law. A recognition of a foreign
judgment is not an action to nullify a marriage. It is an
action for Philippine courts to recognize the effectivity
of a foreign judgment, which presupposes a case
which was already tried and decided under foreign
law. (Fujiki v. Marinay, 20 June 2013).
254

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

Q.

Merlyn requested from the NSO a CENOMAR
(Certificate of No Marrlage) for the purpose of
marrying her boyfriend of 5 years. To her shock,
she discovered that per records she had been married

to a certain Ye Son Sune, a Korean National, in a
wedding celebrated at the MTCC In Cebu City.
Merlyn thus filed a petition under Rule 108 for

cancellation of entries in the marriage contract,
especially in the wife portion thereof. During the
trial, it was proved that Merlyn never knew Ye nor
did she appear before any marriage ceremony at
the MTCC and that her purported signatures in the
marriage contract were forged. The trial court
granted Merlyn's petition. On appeal, the Republic
argued that the cancellation of the entries in the
marriage contract was in effect a nullification of
the marriage which could only have been done in
a petition for declaration of nullity of marriage.
The Republic thus prayed that the trial court's
decision be set aside, Should the Republic's
appeal be granted?
A.

No, the Republic's appeal should not be granted.

R108 may be availed of to cancel entries in a
fake marriage contract. Here another person had
posed as the petitioner and contracted a marriage
with a Korean. There is no need to file a petition for
declaration of nullity of marriage with the Family Court
since there was no marriage to speak of in the first
place. (Republic v. Olaybar, 10 February 2014)"

Ake in 2014 Remedial Lew Bar Examination
255

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Sex-change cases
Q.

Petitioner Rommel Jacinto Dantes Silverio filed
with the RTC of Manila a petition for the change of
his first name and sex in his birth certificate. The
Petition alleges that Petitioner ls a male transsexual,

that is "anatomically male but feels, thinks, and
acts as a female," and that the Petitioner's efforts to
transform himself into a female culminated with a
"sex reassignment surgery" In Thailand, Should
the petition be granted?
A.

No. The Petitioner's basis for changing his name was
his change of sex. Considering that there is no law
recognizing sex reassignment, the determination of a
person's sex made at the time of his or her birth, if not
attended by error, is immutable. Hence the petition to
change his sex, and correlatively his name, must fail
for lack of legal basis.
On a procedural note, the Supreme Court stated
that the petition Insofar 3S It relates to the change of
first name should have been filed with the LCR which
has primary jurisdiction pursuant to R.A. No. 9048.
(Silverio v. Republi,c G.R. No. 174689, 22 October 2007)

Q.

Respondent was born in 1981 and registered a
female in her birth certificate. While growing up
she developed secondary male characteristics
and was diagnosed to have congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH) which is a condition where
persons thus afflicted possess both female and
male characteristics. At 13 years of age, tests
revealed that her ovarian structures had minimized,
she had stopped growing, and she has no breast
or menstrual development.

256

I

I

I

l

RULE 108
Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

In 2003 Respondent filed a petition for
correction of entries in the birth certificate with
the RTC of Siniloan, Laguna. She prayed that her
birth certificate be corrected such that her gender
be changed from female to male and her first
name be changed from Jennifer to Jeff. The RT
granted Respondent's petition. On appeal the
Republic contends that the petition did not comply

with R103 and R108. The Republic contends that
the LCR, who is an indispensable party under S3
R108 was not impleaded, and that CAH was not a
valid ground for change of sex. Should the RTC'S
decision be set aside?
A.

No, the RTC's decision should not be set aside.
S6 R1 provides that the Rules of Court shall be
liberally construed in order to promote their objective
of securing a just, inexpensive, and speedy disposition of
every action and proceeding. There was substantial
compliance with S3 R108 when petitioner furnished a
copy of the petition to the local civil registrar.

Where a person is biologically or naturally intersex,
the determining factor in his gender classification is
what the individual, upon reaching the age of majority,
with good reason thinks of his or her sex.

Considering that the Respondent's change of
name from Jennifer to Jeff merely recognizes his preferred
gender, such should be granted. Such change will
conform to the change of the entry in birth certificate
from female to male. (Republic v. Cagandahan, G.R.
No. 166676, 12 September 2008).

257

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Note: The SC did not tackle the Republic's
argument that the petition was fatally defective since it
did not allege that the Respondent was a bona fide
resident for 3 years of the place where the petition
was filed prior to its filing. This omission may be
justified by the fact that the principal proceeding was
for change of entry [sex] with the change of name
simply being an incident or a logical consequence of
the change of sex. Hence the procedural infirmity,
which relates to R103 rather than R108, may be
overlooked in the interest of substantial justice.
Q.

May a petition for change of name and correction of

entries in the civil registry be joined in one proceeding?
A.

It is submitted that a petition for change of name and
correction of entry may be joined in one proceeding if
the change of name and correction of entry are based
on the same underlying facts or logically connected to
each other an provided that all the requirements of
R108 an R108 are complied with. (Republic v.
Belmonte, G.R. No. L-32600, 26 February 1988)
Thus in Republic v. Cagandahan, supra, the Supreme
Court upheld the propriety of a petition which asks for
the change of sex from female to male and the
change of name from Jennifer to Jeff.
As to the venue, it is submitted that venue should
follow that for the principal proceeding. Thus in
Cagandahan the principal proceeding is the change of
sex (the change of name being merely incidental);
hence the venue should be with 'the RTC of the place
where the corresponding civil registry is located.
If however there is no factual or legal connection
between the change of name and the correction of
entry, it is submitted that the two reliefs cannot be granted
in one proceeding. Unlike causes of actions in civil

258

RULE 108

Cancellation or Correction of
Entries in the Civil Registry

actions which may be joined under S5 R2, change of
name and correction of entry cannot be similarly
joined since there is a public interest involved and the
procedural safeguards designed for R103 and R108
would be undermined. (Republic v. Belmonte, supra).
Q.

Kris Anne Dela Vega Vergara filed with the RTC of
Pasig City a "Petition for Correction of the Entries
in the Certificate of Live Birth" seeking the correction
of her name from "Ronald" to "Kris Anne" and her
sex from "Male" to "Female." The notice of hearing
was posted and published in a newspaper of
general circulation and notices were sent to the
0SG, the Civil Registrar-General and the Local
Civil Registrar of Pasig City. No opposition was
filed. The 0SG did not oppose the petition and the
motion to present petitioner's evidence ex parte.
The RTC granted the petition. The Republic
through the OSG filed an appeal to the CA where
it raised for the first time the objection that the
RTC did not acquire jurisdiction over the proceedings
since the title of the petition did not contain
petitioner's aliases as required by R103. May the
RTC decision be set aside on the ground that it
did not acquire jurisdiction over the petition?

A.

No. The Supreme Court held that it is R108 and not
R103 which is applicable since petitioner simply
wanted to correct the clerical fault or error in the entry
of her sex and name and not to change her name.

The Supreme Court also held that even if R103
were applicable, it could not be denied that the
petitioner had complied with the requirements for an
adversarial proceeding before the RTC The publication
and posting of the notice of hearing in a newspaper of

259

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
general circulation and the notices sent to the OSG,
the Civil Registrar-General and the Local Civil Registrar
of Pasig City are sufficient indicia of an adverse
proceeding. The fact that no one opposed the petition,
including the OSG, did not deprive the court of its

jurisdiction to hear the same and did not make the
proceedings less adversarial in nature. Considering
that the OSG did not oppose the petition and the

motion to present evidence ex parte when it had the
opportunity to do so, it cannot now complain that the
proceedings in tho lower court were defective.
(Republic v. Dela Vega Vergara, [Res.], G.RR. No.
195873, 23 February 2015).

260

R.A. NO. 9048 as amended by R.A. No. 10172
(ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGE OF FIRST
NAME OR NICKNAME AND CORRECTION
OF CLERICAL/TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS)
Q.

May an entry in a civil register be changed or
corrected without a judicial order?

A.

As a general rule no, except for
1) Clerical or typographical errors, and
2) Change of first name or nickname
3) Change of the day and month in the date of birth
or sex of a person where it is patently clear that
there was a clerical or typographical error or
mistake in the entry.

The foregoing can be corrected or changed by
the concerned city or municipal civil registrar (LCR) or
consul general (CG).
Q.

What is a clerical or typographical error?

A.

A clerical or a typographical error refers to a mistake
committed in the performance of clerical work in
writing, copying, transcribing or typing an entry in the
civil register that is harmless and innocuous, such as
misspelled name or misspelled place of birth, mistake
in the entry of day and month in the date of birth or
the sex of the person or the like, which is visible to the
eyes or obvious to the understanding, and can be
corrected or changed only by reference to other

RA. No. 9048 took effect on 22 April 2001 (Republic v Safi, 3 Apnl
2017), while RA. No. 10172 took effect on 3 September 2012
get" hore means "simply,' not exclusively. Thus a chearer phrasing
ls and can be corrected or changed simply by reference to other existing ecord
or records.

261

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

existing record or records; provided, however, that no
correction must involve the change of nationality, age,
or status (SAN) of the petitioner. (S2[3], RA 9048)

0.

On 13 May 2010, Respondent Michelle Soriano
Gallo filed with the RTC a petition for correction of
entry in her birth certificate under Rule 108. Gallo
has never been known as "Michael Soriano Gallo."
She has always been female. Her parents, married
on May 23, 1981, have never changed their names.
For her, in her petition before the Regional Trial
Court, her Certificate of Live Birth contained errors,
which should be corrected. For her, she was not
changing the name that was given to her; she was
merely correcting its entry.

To accurately reflect these facts in her
documents, Gallo prayed before the Regional Trial
Court of Ilagan City, lsabela In Special Proc. No.
21555 for the correction of her name from
"Michael" to "Michello" and of her biological sex
from "Male" to "Female" under Rule 108 of the
Rules of Court.
In addition, Gallo asked for the inclusion of
her middle name, "Soriano," her mother's middle
name "Angangan," her father's middle name,
"Balingao"; and her parent's marriage date, May
23, 1981, in her Certificate of Live Birth, as these
were not recorded.

The RTC rendered a decision granting the
petition. On appeal, the Republic argued that the
applicable rule should be Rule 103 for Petitions
for Change of Name. It also argued that Gallo did
not comply with the jurisdictional requirements
under Rule 103 because the title of her Petition
and the published Order did not state her official
name, "Michael Gallo." Furthermore, the published

262

Administrative Change of First Name or Nickname
And Correction of Clerical/Typographical Errors

Order was also defective for not stating the cause
of the change of name, The Republic also argued
that Respondent failed to exhaust administrative
remedies and to observe the doctrine of primary
jurisdiction as the petition should have been filed
with the L.CR pursuant to R.A. 9048.
A.

Assuming that RA. 9048 has not yet been enacted,
the applicable rule would not be R103 but R108. The
entry of "Michelle" as Michael" is merely a clerical or
typographical error.
However at the time Respondent filed her
petition, R.A. No. 9048 had already taken effect on 22
April 2001. Hence under the doctrine of primary
jurisdiction, Respondent should have filed her petition
with the LCR as it merely involves clerical or
typographical errors." Likewise, the prayers to enter
Gallo's middle name as Soriano, the middle names of
her parents as Angangan for her mother and Balingao
for her father, and the date of her parents' marriage
as 23 May 1981 fall under clerical or typographical
errors as mentioned in Republic Act No. 9048, since
these corrections may be done by referring to existing
records in the civil register. None of it involves any
change in Gallo's nationality, age, status, or sex.
Nevertheless the government was estopped from
raising this ground since it raised for the first time only
before the Supreme Court, The Supreme Court thus
affirmed the RTC's decision. (Republic v. Gallo, 17
January 2018, Leonen, J.).

re

Court said however that the Petition for charge of sex was correctly
filed with the RTC sine RR.A. No. 10172 (ef. 3 September 2012) was not yet
in force,

263

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

ls a petition to change "Feliclano Bartholome" to
"Ruben Cruz Bartolome" covered by RA 9048?

A.

Yes. A prayer to enter a person's middle name is a
mere clerical error which may be corrected by referring to
existing records. (Republic v. Gallo, 17 January 2018,
Leonen, J. Bartolome v, Republic, 28 August 2019,
Caguioa, J)

Q.

Who may file the petition for change or correction

and where shall it be filed?
A.

Any person having direct and personal interest in the
correction of a clerical or typographical error in an
entry and/or change of first name or nickname in the
civil register may file, in parson, a verified petition with
the local civil registry where the record being sought
to be corrected or changed is kept. (S3 RA 9048)

0.

What if the petitioner has already migrated to
another place in the country and it would not be
practical for such party, in terms of transportation
expenses, time and effort (TET) to appear in
person before the local civil registrar (LCR) keeping
the documents to be corrected or changed?
Where may he file the petition?

A.

In such a case, the petition may be filed, in person,
with the LCR of the place where the interested party
is presently residing or domiciled. The two LCRs
concerned will then coordinate to facilitate the processing
of the petition. (S3)

Q.

How about Filipino citizens who are presently
residing or domiciled in foreign countries? Where
may they file their petition?

A.

They may file their petition, in person, with the nearest
Philippine Consulate. (S3). It appears that former
Filipinos presently residing or domiciled abroad cannot
avail of this provision.

264

Administrative Change of First Name or Nickname
And Correction of Clerical/Typographical Errors

0.

What are the requirements for correction of
erroneous entry concerning the day and month of
the birth date or the sex of a person?

A.

No petition for correction of erroneous entry
concerning the birth date or the sex of a person shall
be entertained except if the petition is accompanied
by earliest school record or earliest school documents
such as, but not limited to, medical records, baptismal
certificate and other documents issued by religious
authorities, nor shall any entry involving change of
gender be corrected except if the petition is accompanied
by a certification issued by an accredited government
physician attesting to the fact that the petitioner has
not undergone sex change or sex transplant. The
petition for change of first name or nickname, or for
correction of erroneous entry concerning the day and
month in the date of birth or the sex of a person, as
the case may be, shall be published at least once a
week for two (2) consecutive weeks In a newspaper of
general circulation,

Q.

In 2009, petitioner filed with the RTC a petition
under R108 to correct a clerlcal or typographical
error in his sex, which was indicated in his birth
certificate as "female." He presented a medical
certificate by a government physician that he was
"phenotypically male." The RTC granted the
petition. On appeal, the Republic contends that the
Medical Certificate failed to include a certification
that respondent "has not undergone sex change
or sex transplant" as required by Section 5 of RA
9048. ls the Republic's contention correct?

A.

No, "Phenotypically male" means conceived and born
male. Hence ii no longer requires a certification that
petitioner "has not undergone sex change or sex
transplant." (Republic v. Unabia, 11 February 2019,
Del Castillo, J. ).

265

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The court justified the application of RA 9048, as
amended by RA 10172, in the RTC case as follows:
When Special Proceeding No. 2009-018 was
filed in 2009, the governing law then was the original,
unamended RA 9048. There was no provision then
for the administrative correction or change of clerical
or typographical errors or mistakes in the civil registry

entries of the sex of individuals, but only clerical or
typographical errors and change of first names or
nicknames. Administrative corrections or changes
relating to the sex of individuals was authorized only
with the passage in 2012 Of RA 10172. Even then, the
amendments under RA 10172 should still apply, the

law being remedial in nature. Moreover, under Section
11 of RA 9048, retroactive application is allowed
"insofar as it does not prejudice or impair vested or
acquired rights in accordance with the Civil Code and
other laws."
Q.

How many times may petitions for the correction
of clerical or typographical errors and/or change
of first name or nickname be availed of?

A.

Only once, (S3). Hence if a person has availed of a
petition for correction of clerical or typographical error
under R.A. No. 9048 and he wants to correct another
clerical or typographical error, he should file a petition
with the RTC under R108.

However if a person has filed a petition for
correction of clerical or typographical errors, he can
still avail of a petition for change of first name or
nickname, and vice versa.
Q.

Which court or body would have jurisdiction over
a petition for change of first name or nickname or
for correction of clerical or typographical errors?

266

,
Administrative Change of First Name or Nickname
And Correction of Clerical/Typographical Errors

A.

Primary jurisdiction would be with the Local Civil
Registrar or the Consul General. However in case
where the petition has been denied by the LCR or CG
or where the petitioner is availing for the second time
of the remedy, then jurisdiction is with the RTC.
(Silverio v. Republic, G.R. No, 174689, 22 October
2007; S3 & 7, RA 9048).

Change of first name or nickname
Q.

What are the grounds for change of first name or
nickname?

A,

The petition for change of first name or nickname may
be allowed in any of the following cases; (DR DHC)
(1) The first name or nickname is ridiculous, tainted

with dishonor or extremely difficult to write or

pronounce;
(2) The new first name or nickname has been
habitually and continuously used by the petitioner
and he has been publicly known by that first
name or nickname in the community; or
(3) The change will avoid confusion.
The grounds are exclusive. See S7(3) RA 9048.
Q.

ls publication a requirement in a petition for change
of first name or nickname?

A.

Yes publication is required., The petition shall be
published at least once a week for 2 consecutive
weeks (1x2) in a newspaper of general circulation.
Publication is not required in a petition for correction
of clerical or typographical errors, except where the
erroneous entry is of the date and month of the birth
date or of the sex of a person,

267

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the remedy of a petitioner if his petition ls
denied by the LCR or the consul general?

A.

He may either appeal the decision to the civil registrar
general or file the appropriate petition with the proper
court. (S7). Under the Rules of the Civil Registrar
General, the petitioner should file a notice of appeal
within 10 working ays from notice.

Q.

A man goes by the name of Jennifer Reynes,
which name he has been using and by which he
has been known since childhood. Recently, he
checked his birth certificate and discovered the
following: (a) His surname was indicated as "Reyes"
rather than "Reynes." (b) His sex was indicated
as "Female" rather than "Male." Jennifer goes to
you and wants to correct the foregoing entries.
He also wants to change his first name from
"Jennifer" to "Jefferson" because he is often
confused for a female and many people tease him
about his feminine first name.

(A) What remedy/remedies would you advise
Jennifer Reyes to avail of? Explain the reason
for avalllng of such remedy/remedies.
(B) ls publication a requirement for such remedy/
remedies?

A
(A)
(a) For changing "Reyes" to "Reynes", I would advise
Jennifer Reynes to avail of an administrative
petition for correction of clerical or typographical
with the local civil registrar under R.A. No. 9048.

268

Administrative Change of First Name or Nickname
And Correction of Clerical/Typographical Errors

Under R.A. No. 9048, a petition for correction of
clerical or typographical error may be filed with the
LCR. A clerical or typographical error is one which is
visible to the eyes or obvious to the understanding.

Here the error is visible to the eyes or obvious to

the understanding since it involves the deletion of only
one letter from the surname. Hence a petition for
correction may be filed with the LCR.
(b) For changing the entry on his sex from "female"
to "male," I would advise Jennifer to file a petition
for change of entry of sex with the LCR pursuant

to R.A. No. 9048.
Under RA. No. 9048, the entry of sex may be
changed where it is patently clear that there was a
mistake fn the entry.
Here it is patently clear that there was a mistake
in the entry of Jennifer's sex. Hence an administrative
petition for change of entry of sex may be availed of.
For changing the name "Jennifer" to "Jefferson," I
would advise Jennifer Reynes to file a petition for

change of first name with the LCR.
Under R.A. No, 9048, a petition for change of
first name may be availed of if the change will avoid
confusion.
Here the change will avoid confusion as to the
sex of Jennifer Reynes. Hence I would advise Jennifer to

file a petition for change of first name with the LCR.

269

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(B)
Publication would be required in the petition to
change first name and in the petition to change entry
of sex pursuant to RA. No. 9048.
Publication would not be required in the petition

to correct "Reyes" to "Reynes" since it is a simple
typographical error not involving sex or day or month
of birth under RR.A. No. 9048.
Q.

Distinguish between change of name under R.A.
No. 9048 and under R103.

A.

RA 9048

R103

Change of first name or
nickname only

Change of name (including
first name or nickname but

primary jurisdiction with

I
LCRCG;
Filed with LCR where record
kept; if migrant, with LCR of
residence or domicile; if

Filed with RTC where
petitioner resides

Filipino citizen residing or
domiciled abroad, with the
nearest Phil. Consulate

l-Publication1Xx?

Publication 1x 3

Grounds for change of name

are exclusive

Grounds for change of name
are not exclusive

Appeal to the CRG within 10

Appeal to the CA within 15

working days from
notice days from notice

270

Administrative Change of First Name or Nickname
And Correction of Clerical/
Typographical Errors

Q.

Distinguish between correction of entries under
R.A. No. 9048 and under R108.

A.

�--

RA 9048
Correction of clenical or
typographical errors only

R108

Correction of substantial
errors (and clerical or
typographical errors but
primary jurisdiction with

(excluding SAN)

LCRCG
Filed with LCR where record

Filed with RTC where
kept, if migrant, with LCR of
corresponding civil registry is
residence or domicile; if
kept
Filipino citizen residing or
domiciled abroad, with the
nearest Phil. Consulate
No publication except if
Publication 1x 3
correction of erroneous entry
of day and month of birth
date or sex in which cas�
publication 1x 2
zeal the CRG within 10
Appeal to the CA within 15
orkin_ days from notice
days from notice
'

to

271

RULE107.ABSENTEES
Q.

What is the purpose of R107?

A.

The primordial purpose of R17 is to provide for an
administrator of the property of the absentee. The
general interest of society may require that property
does not remain abandoned without someone representing
it and without an owner. (Reyes v. Alejandro, G.R.
No, L-32026, 16 January 1986).

Q.

Which court has subject-matter jurisdiction over
petitions under R1077

A.

The RTC pursuant to Sac. 19(7) of B.P. Blg. 129.

Q.

When may the petition for appointment of a
representative for_an absentee under R107 be filed?
Where may the petition be filed?

A.

When a person disappears from his domicile, his
whereabouts being unknown, and without having left
an agent to administer his property, or the power
conferred upon the agent has expired, any interested
party, relative, or friend may petition the RTC of the place
where the absentee resided before his disappearance
for the appointment of a person to represent him
provisionally in all that may be necessary. (S1 R107)

Q.

When may the petition for declaration of absence
and appointment of a trustee or administrator
be filed?

A.

After the lapse of 2Z years from a person's disappearance
and without any news about the absentee or since the
receipt of the last news, or of 5_ years in case the absentee
has left a person in charge of the administration of his
property, the declaration of his absence and the
appointment of a trustee or administrator may be
applied for by any of the following:

272

RULE 107
Absentees

(a) The spouse present;
.

(b) The heirs instituted in a will, who may present an
authentic copy of the same;
(c) The Intestate heirs: and
(d) Those who have over the property of the absentee
some right subordinated to the condition of
his death.
Q.

In a petition filed in 1969, Erlinda prayed for the
declaration of the absence of her husband

Roberto alleging that her husband had been
absent from their conjugal dwelling since 1962
and since then had not been heard from nor his
whereabouts known, The petition further alleged
that her husband left no will nor any property in
his name nor any debts. After hearing the Court a
quo dismissed the petition on the ground that
since Roberto left no property there was no
necessity to declare him judicially an absentee.
Was the dismissal proper?

A.

Yes. The primordial purpose of R107 is to provide for
an administrator of the property of the absentee. The
general interest of society may require that property
does not remain abandoned without someone
representing it and without an owner. Since Roberto
has no property, there is no point in declaring him an
absentee. (Reyes v. Alejandro, G.R. No.L-32026, 16
January 1986).
Note; If the purpose of the spouse present is to
contract a subsequent marriage, the proper remedy is
the institution of a summary judicial proceeding for the
declaration of presumptive death of the absentee
spouse pursuant to Articles 41 and 253 of the Family
Code. Note that the judgment of the court therein
shall be final and executory pursuant to Article 247
273

RULE109.APPEALSIN
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Q.

What are the orders or judgments in special
proceedings from which an appeal may be taken?

A.

An appeal may be taken from an order or judgment:
(HACAFF)
(a) Allowg or disallows a will
(b) Determines who are the lawful heirs or the
distributive share of the estate to which such heir
is entitled,
(c) Allows or disallows any claim against the estate or

any claim presented on behalf of the estate to
offset a claim against it.
(d) Settlos the account of an executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian (GATE).
(e) Constitutes in estate proceedings or those relating

to the administration of a trustee or a guardian
(GET), a final determination in the lower court of
the rights (fdr) of the party appealing.

(f) Which is the final order or judgment rendered in
the case, and affects the substantial rights of the
person appealing (foasra). (S1 R109),
Q.

After the death of Beatriz Silverio, her surviving
spouse, Ricardo Silverio, Sr,, filed an intestate
proceeding for the settlement of her estate.
Ricardo was appointed administrator. Shortly
thereafter the RTC issued an order directing Nelia
Silverio-Dee to vacate the premises of the estate
property located at Forbes Park, Makati City. Nelia

274

RULE 109
Appeals in Special Proceedings

filed a motion for reconsideration but this was

denied by the RTC, Subsequently Nelia appealed
the order by filing a notice of appeal and a record
on appeal. Should the appeal be allowed?

A.

No. The order of the intestate court for Nelly to vacate
a portion of the estate property is only an interlocutory

order that may not be the subject of an appeal. It is
not a final determination of the case or of the issue of
distribution of the shares of the heirs in the estate or
their rights therein. It must be borne in mind that until
the estate is partitioned, each heir only has an
inchoate night to the properties of the estate, such that
no heir may lay claim on a particular property.
(Silverio v. Court of Appeals, G.R. NO. 178933, 16
September 2009).
Q.

The decedent was survived by his widow and his
five children (respondent heirs).
Believing that the decedent died intestate,
the respondent heirs filed a petition with the RTC
for the settlement of the decedent's estate. The
case was raffled to Branch 254 and docketed as
Sp. Proc. Case No, SP-03-0060 (Intestate Case).
Subsequently, Iris Morales filed a separate
petition with the RTC alleging that the decedent
left a will. Morales prayed for the probate of the
will. Her petition was raffled also to Branch 254
and docketed as Sp. Proc. Case No. SP.03-0069
(Testate Case). Morales filed a manifestation in
the Testate Case and moved to suspend the
intestate proceedings in order to give way to the
probate proceedings in the Testate Case. The
respondent heirs opposed Morales' motion for
suspension and her petition for allowance of the
will. The RTC consolidated the Intestate Case with
the Testate Case.
275

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

The RTC issued an order suspending the
intestate proceedings and setting the case for
probate. The RTC reasoned that probate proceedings
take precedence over intestate proceedings. Two
months later the respondent heirs moved for
reconsideration of the order. The respondent
heirs argued that the will was void because of
preterition. The RTC granted the motion, set aside
the order setting the case for probate, and
ordered the case to proceed in intestacy. Morales
moved for reconsideration which the RTC denied,
Morales filed a petition for certiorari against the
orders of the RTC. Morales maintains that the RTC
committed grave abuse of discretion when it
ordered the case to proceed intestate because the
order setting the case for probate already attained
finality since there was no appeal therefrom
within 30 days from notice, ls Morales correct?
A.

No. There is no merit in Morales' argument that the
previous order setting the case for probate attained

finality. The disputed order is merely interlocutory and can
be modified or rescinded even after 30 days from notice.
(Morales • Olonodriz, 3 February 2016, Brion, 4.).°
Q.

In estate proceedings, may the court pending a
controversy or appeal, allow an advance distribution?

A,

Yes the court may in its discretion and upon proper
and just terms, allow advance distribution subject to
the following requirements: (NP)
1)

Advance distribution shall pertain only to such part
of the estate as may not be affected by the
controversy or appeal.

compare an order setting the case for probate with an order probating or
allowing a will which is an order that would become final if not appealed within

30 days from notice. (S1 R75, S1[a} R109)

276

RULE 109
Appeals in Special Proceedings

2) The debts, funeral charges, administration expenses,
and estate taxes must first have been paid,
unless the distributees or any of them give a bond
to secure such payment. (S2 R109).3
0.

ls the probate court's order denying a motion for
advance distribution appealable?

A.

No. Such order is merely interlocutory and thus not
appealable. (Ignaci ov. Reyes, 12 July 2017)

see also Section 94 of the National Internal Revenue Code which
provides that [rJo judge shall author ze the executor or adrunistrator to delver a
distributive share to any party interested in the estate unless a certification from
the Commissioner that te estate tax has been paid is shown.'

277

CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

!

1

e

•

PRELIMINARIES
Q.

Distinguish jurisdiction over the subject matter in
criminal cases from jurisdiction over the person
of the accused.

A.

Jurisdiction over the subject matter in criminal cases
is the power of a court to try a particular class of
criminal offenses as defined by the legislature while

jurisdiction over the person of the accused is the
power of a court to try a case with binding effect as
against an accused. Jurisdiction over the subject matter
is conferred by law while jurisdiction over the person
of the accused is obtained by tho arrest of the accused or

his voluntary Surrender or appearance in court.

Jurisdiction over the subject matter in criminal
cases is also known as jurisdiction over the offense.

0.

What are the requisites for the exercise of
criminal jurisdiction?

A.

The requisites for the exercise of criminal jurisdiction
are the following: (a) the court must have jurisdiction
over the offense and (b) it must have jurisdiction over
the person of the accused.

Q.

How does a court acquire jurisdiction over the
person of the accused?

A.,

Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is acquired
either by his arrest or by his voluntary appearance in
court. The voluntary appearance of the accused may
be made by the filing of a pleading or motion in court.
However if the motion to quash was precisely and
exclusively to challenge the jurisdiction of the court
over the accused's person under S3(b) R117, the
accused is not deemed to have made a voluntary
appearance.

281

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Jose, Alberto, and Romeo were charged with
murder. Upon filing of the information, the RTC judge
issued the warrants for their arrest. Learning of
the issuance of the warrants, the three accused
jointly filed a motion for reinvestigation and for
the recall of the warrants of arrest. On the date
set for hearing of their motion, none of the accused
showed up in court for fear of being arrested. The
RTC judge denied their motion because the RTC
did not acquire jurisdiction over the persons of
the movants, Did the RTC rule correctly? (08
Bar 010).

A.

The RTC did not rule correctly in denying the motion
for reinvestigation and for the recall of the warrants of
the arrest.

Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
acquired either by his arrest or by his voluntary
appearance in court. The voluntary appearance of the
accused may be made by the filing of a pleading or
motion in court asking for affirmative relief. Here the
accused voluntarily appeared when they fled the motion
asking for affirmative relief, that is, a reinvestigation,
Moreover, resolution of a motion to quash a
warrant of arrest does not require that the court have
jurisdiction over the person of the accused and
resolution of a motion for reinvestigation does not
require that the accused be in the custody of the law.
(Miranda v. Tulia0, G.R. No. 158763, 31 March 2006)
Q.

The accused in a criminal case for falsification of
public document filed a motion for redetermination
of probable cause before the MTC. The MTC
denied the motion on the ground that It did not
have jurisdiction over the person of the accused
who had not yet boon arrested. Was the MTC's
denial correct?

282

PRELIMINARIES

A.

No. One who seeks affirmative relief from a court,
whether in a criminal or civil case, is deemed to have
submitted his person to the jurisdiction of the court.

While custody of the law is required before a court
can act upon a bail application, it is not required for
the adjudication of other reliefs where the mere
application constitutes a submission of one's person
to the court's jurisdiction. (David v. Agbay, 18 March 2015)

0.

An accused former mayor was charged before
the Sandiganbayan with the complex crime of
malversation of public funds through falsification
of official/public documents. The amount alleged
to have been malversed was P274,000. The Ombudsman
recommended that no bail be granted, The
Sandiganbayan issued an arrest order adopting
the "no bail" recommendation of the Ombudsman.
The accused, who was still at large, caused the
filing of a Motion to Set Aside No Bail Recommendation
and to Fix the Amount of Sail. The Ombudsman
argued that the Sandiganbayan cannot grant
affirmative relief to the accused who was at large.
Was the Ombudsman correct?

A.

;

No. Consistent with Miranda v. Tulia0, G.R. No.
158763, 31 March 2006, an affirmative relief may be
obtained from the court despite the accused being still
at-large. Except in petition for bail, custody of the law
is not required for the adjudication of reliefs sought by
the defendant (such as a motion to set aside no bail
recommendation and to fix the amount of bail in this
case) where the mere application therefor constitutes
a waiver of the defense of lack of jurisdiction over the
person of the accused. (People v. Valdez, 8 December
2015,eb., Peralta, J,).

283

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

The accused were charged before the RTC of the
crime of largo scale estafa punishable by reclusion
perpetua. A warrant of arrest was issued against
them. Four years later, the accused filed a motion
to quash warrant of arrest and to fix bail. They
claimed that the Informations failed to allege that
the crimes charged against them had been
amended by Presidential Decree No. 1689, hence,
the penalty for estafa under paragraph 2(a),
Article 315 of the RPC shall be in the range of
reclusion temporal, as maximum. They averred
that the Informations, likewise, failed to allege any
aggravating circumstance which is necessary for
the purpose of imposing the penalty of reclusion
perpetua. Thus, petitioners averred that the imposable
penalty cannot exceed 20 years of imprisonment
which is the maximum of reclusion temporal,
therefore, the charges in the Informations are
bailable, and that they are entitled to bail for their
provisional liberty, The RTC denied the motion on
the ground that the accused continued to be at
large and thus the court has no jurisdiction over
their persons. Was the denial by the RTC correct?

A.

No, the requirement that the accused must be in
custody of law applies only to an application for bail,
not to applications for other relief. However, albeit, at
large, it must be clarified that accused's motion to
quash warrant of arrest and to fix bail is not an
application for bail. They were neither applying for
bail, nor were they posting bail. Of course if the
motion to fix bail is granted, the accused must be in
custody of law when they apply for ball. (Padua v.
People, 4 Feb 2019, Peralta, J.)

284

PRELIMINARIES

The ground that the court has no jurisdiction over
the persons of the accused is misplaced. Jurisdiction

over the person of an accused is not required in a
motion to quash an arrest warrant. Insofar as the
motion to fix the bail is concerned, the court acquired

jurisdiction over the accused when they filed such
motion from the court seeking affirmative relief. (See
Miranda v. Tullao, 31 March 2006).
Q.

Outline the criminal jurisdiction of courts.

A.

MUNICIPAL TRIAL COURTS

Exclusive original jurisdiction (ROBOT 6.4N)

1) Violations of city or municipal ordinances committed
within their respective territorial jurisdictions.
2) Violations of traffig laws, rules, and regulations.

3) Violations of the rental law
4)

Violations of 8.P. BIg. 22 or the Bouncinu Checks

Law.
5) Offenses punishable with imprisonment not exceeding
f years, irrespective of the amount of fine; provided,
however, that in offenses involving damage to
property through criminal negligence, they shall
have exclusive original jurisdiction.
6)

Offenses where the only penalty provided by law
is a fine, where such fine does not exceed P4 000.
(See Adm. Cir. No. 09-94, 14 June 1994)

me fine exceeds P4,000, then it is the RTC which has jurisdiction.

285

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
REGIONAL TRIAL COURTS

Exclusive original jurisdiction (MCLE DEC)

1) Criminal cases not falling within the exclusive
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal, or body.
2)

Criminal actions or proceedings for violation of the
Omnibus Election Code.

3) Cases of libel
4)

Criminal

actions

involving

violations

of

the

Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002.

5)

Money-Launderng cases. Those committed by
public officers and private persons who are in
conspiracy with such public officers shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan.

6) Violations of the Cybercrime Prevention Act. ($21,
R.A. No. 10175).
7) Violations of the Philippine Competition Act. ($44,
Philippine Competition Act).

Family Courts (MD VCD)

1) Criminal cases where one or more of the accused
is below 18 years of age but not less than 9 years
of age, or where one or more of the victims is a
minor at the time of the commission of the offense.

2) Cases against minors cognizable under the Dangerous
Drugs Act as amended.
3) Violations of RR.A. No. 7610 or the Child Abuse Act.

4)

Cases of domestic violence against women and
children (Sec. 5, R.A. No. 8369)

286

PRELIMINARIES

5) Cases of violence against women and their children
under R.A.No. 9262 (VOWCHI Act)
The Family Court has no jurisdiction in a murder
case where the minor victims are dead. Undoubtedly,
in vesting in family courts exclusive original jurisdiction

over criminal cases involving minors, the law but
seeks to protect their welfare and best interests. Here
there is no living minor in the murder cases that
require the special attention and protection of a family
court. (People v. Dela Torre-Yadao, 13 November
2012, e.b., Abad, J.).

Special Commerclal Courts
Actions or proceedings involving violations of
intellectual property_rights (A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC
effective 1 July 2003; Samson v. Daway, 21 July
2004, Ynares-Santiago, J.),
Appellate jurisdiction
Over all cases decided by the MTC within its
territorial jurisdiction.
SANDIGANBAYAN

Original exclusive jurisdiction
a) Violations of the Anti-Graft Law, R.A. No. 1379 (illgotten wealth obtained by public officers) and
Chapter 2, Section 2, Tille VII, Book II of the
Revised Penal Code (Bribery and Corruption of
Public Officials), where one or more of the accused
are officials occupying the following positions in the
government, whether in a permanent, acting Or
interim capacity, at the time of the commission of
the offense:
287

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(1)

Officials of the executive branch occupying the
positions of regional director and higher,
otherwise classified as Grade "27" and higher of
the Compensation and Position Classification Act
of 1989 (R.A. No. 6758), specifically including:

(a)

Provincial governors, vice-governors, members
of the sangguniang panlalawigan, and
provincial treasurers, assessors, engineers,
and other provincial department heads;

(b) City mayors, vice-mayors, members of the
sangguniang panlungsod, city treasurer,
assessors, engineers, and other city department
heads;
(c)

(d)

Officials of the diplomatic service occupying
the position of consul and higher;

Philippine army and air force colonels, naval
captains, and all officers of higher rank;

(e)

Officers of the PNP while occupying the
position of provincial director and those holding
the rank of senior superintendent or higher;

(f)

City and provincial prosecutors and their

assistants, and officials and prosecutors in
the office of the Ombudsman and special
prosecutor;
(g)

(2)

Presidents, directors or trustees, or managers
of GOCCs, state universities or educational
institutions or foundations.

Members of Congress and officials thereof
classified as Grade "27" and up under the
Compensation and Position Classification Act
of 1989;

288

PRELIMINARIES

(3)

Members of the judiciary without prejudice to the
provisions of the Constitution;

(4) Chairmen

and

members

of

Constitutional

Commissions, without prejudice to the provisions
of the Constitution; and
(5) All other national and local officials classified as
Grade 27 and higher under the Compensation
and Position Classification Act of 1989.

b) Other offenses or felonies whether simple or
complexed with other crimes committed by the
public officials and employees mentioned in subsection
"a" of this section in relation to their office.

c) Civil and criminal cases filed pursuant to and in
connection with Executive Order Nos. 1, 2, 14
and 14-A, issued in 1986 (sequestration cases).

Provided that the RTC shall have exclusive
original jurisdiction where the information: (a) does

not allege any damage to the government or any
bribery; or (b) alleges damage to the government or
bribery arising from the same or closely related

transactions or acts in an amount not exceeding
P1,000,000.
Subject to the rules promulgated by the Supreme

Court, the cases falling under the jurisdiction of the
RTC under this section shall be tried in a judicial region
other than where the official holds office. (P.O. No. 1606
as amended by R.A. No$. 7975, 8249, and 10660)

In cases where none of the accused are
occupying positions corresponding to Salary Grade
27 or higher, or military and PNP officers mentioned
above, exclusive original jurisdiction thereof shall be
vested in the proper RTC or MTC as the case may
be, pursuant to B.P. Blg. 129.
289

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Appellate jurisdiction
The Sandiganbayan shall exercise exclusive
appellate jurisdiction over final judgments, resolutions
or orders of the RTC whether in the exercise of their
own original jurisdiction or of their appellate
jurisdiction as provided in P.D. No. 1606."

In case private individuals are charged as coprincipals, accomplices or accessories with the public

officers or employees, including those employed in
GOCCs, they shall be tried jointly with said public
officers and employees in the proper courts which shall

exercise exclusive jurisdiction over them. (P.D. No. 1606
as amended by RA. Nos. 7975, 8249, and 10660).
Sandiganbayan has no Jurisdiction over charge

of violation of R.A. No. 6713 against BIR Regional
Director whose salary grade does not exceed 26.
(Duncano v. Sandiganbayan, 15 July 2015, Peralta, J.).
Sandiganbayan has original jurisdiction over all
prosecutions for the crime of plunder. (Sec. 3, R.A. No.
7080). The Supreme Court held that the Sandiganbayan
has no original jurisdiction where the crime of plunder
was committed by a public officer with a salary grade
below 27. The Court held that plunder is an officerelated offense under P.D. No. 1606, as amended by

R.A. No. 8249, and thus requires that the accused
public officer must have a salary grade of 27 or
higher. (Organo v. Sandiganbayan, 14 December
1999, Panganiban, J.)

rhis paragraph refers to those offenses which wouid have fallen within
the ursdiction pf the Sandiganbayan were ! not tor the fact that the accused is
not among those persons mentioned in Section 4(a) of PD No. 1606, or even
where the accused is among such persons but the informatior does not allege
damage to the government or bribery, or aleges such damage or bribery in an
amount not exceeding ft million

290

PRELIMINARRIES

The crime of money-laundering committed by
public officers and private persons who are in
conspiracy with such public officers shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan. (Sec, 5, AntiMoney Laundering Act)

O.

What criminal offenses fall within the jurisdiction
of the Sandiganbayan? (8IGO $PCM)

A.
1) Violations of the Anti-Graft Law (R.A. No. 3019).

2) Illegally Acquired Wealth. (R.A. No. 1379).
3) Bribery and Corruption of Public Officials. (Chapter II,
Section 2, Title VII, Book II of the Revised Penal
Code).
4) Criminal cases filed pursuant to the Sequestration
Law. (E.O No. 1, 2, 14, and 14-A, issued in 1986).

5) Office-related offenses.
6) Plunder. (Sec. 3, R.A. No. 7080)
7)

Money-Laundering. (Sec. 5, Anti-Money Laundering

Act)"
Q.

An information for illegal drug trading in violation
of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act

(CODA) was filed against Sen. Lella De Lima
before the RTC of Muntinlupa City. The information
alleged that accused took advantage of her public
position as then DOJ Secretary to commit illegal

drug trading in the New Bilibid Prison, the
proceeds of which she used to fund her sentorial
" oes not appear from Section 5 of the AMLA that the puoli officer
should be among those mentioned In Sec 4(a) of pD. No. 1606 r that the
money-laundering be office-related, Note tat the AMLA was passed after the
enactment 0t R.A. No. 8249 s that RA 8249 could not be sald to have
Impliedly reposed the AMLA.

291

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

campaign. The accused filed a motion to quash
contending that the allegations in the information
show that the drug-trading was an office-related
offense, I.e., the acts described in the Information
were intimately related to her position as the
Secretary of Justice. Thus it is the Sandiganbayan
(SB) which has exclusive jurisdiction over the
offense charged. Should the motion to quash
be granted?

A.

No, the motion to quash should not be granted. The
RTC has exclusive jurisdiction over violations of the
CDDA per Sec. 90. Sec. 90 of the CDDA (RA 9165)
is a special law which prevails over Sec. 4(b) of PD
1606 (conferring jurisdiction upon the SB over officerelated crimes) which is a general law. Hence even if
the illegal drug trading was office-related, it is the
RTC not the SB which has jurisdiction over the
offense charged. (De Lima v. Guerrero, 10 October
2017, e.b., Velasco, 4.).

Q

The Ombudsman, after conducting the requisite
preliminary investigation, found probable cause to
charge Gov. Matigas in conspiracy with Carpintero, a
private individual, for violating Section 3(e) of
Republic Act (RA) No, 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act, as amended). Before the
information could be filed with the Sandiganbayan,
Gov. Matigas was killed in an ambush, This,
notwithstanding, an information was filed against
Gov. Matigas and Carpintero.

At the Sandiganbayan, Carpintero through
counsel, filed a Motion to Quash the Information,
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction of the
Sandiganbayan, arguing that with the death of
Gov. Matigas, there is no public officer charged in
the information. Is the motion to quash legally
tenable? (14 Bar 15)
292

PRELIMINARIES

A.

No, the motion to quash is not legally tenable.

In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that the death of the public officer did not
mean that the allegation of conspiracy between the
public officer and the private person can no longer be
proved or that their alleged conspiracy is already
expunged. The only thing extinguished by the death
of the public officer was his criminal liability. His death
did not extinguish the crime nor did it remove the
basis of the charge of conspiracy between him and
the private person. Hence the Sandiganbayan had
jurisdiction over the offense charged. [People • Go,
25 March 2014, Peralta, J.J
COURT OF APPEALS

Appellate jurisdiction

Over final judgments, decisions, resolutions, orders,
or awards of the RTC and the Family Court
COURT OF TAX APPEALS

Original Jurisdiction

Over all criminal offenses arising from violations
of the NIRC, TCC, and other laws administered by the
BIR or the BoC, Provided however that offenses or
felonies where the principal amount of taxes and fees,
exclusive of charges and penalties, claimed is less
than P1 million or where there is no specified amount
claimed shall be tried by the regular courts and the
jurisdiction of the CTA shall be appellate.

293

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

Appellate jurisdiction

Over appeals from the judgments, resolutions
or orders of the RTC in tax cases originally decided

by them.
Over petitions for review of the judgments,
resolutions or orders of the RTC in the exercise of
their appellate jurisdiction over tax cases decided by

the MTC.
SUPREME COURT
Appellate jurisdiction
Criminal cases decided by the Court of Appeals,
Sandiganbayan, and CTA.

Q.

What cases before the MTC are governed by the
Rule on Summary Procedure? (ROBOT 6.1-N)

A.

1) Violations of traffig laws, rules, and regulations.
2) Violations of the rental law.
3) Violations of municipal and city ordinances.
4) Violations of B.P. Blg. 22 (Bouncing Checks Law)

5) All other criminal cases where the penalty is
imprisonment not exceeding 6 (six) months, or a
fine not exceeding P1,0QQ, or both.
6)

Offenses involving damage to property through

criminal negligence where the imposable fine
does not exceed P10,000.
+ggi Revised Rule on Summary Procedure as amended by A M. No
00-11-01-SC. effective 15 Apr 2003, which Included BP Big. 22 cases within

te coverage cf the RSP

294

PRELIMINARIES

0.

In complex crimes, how is the jurisdiction of a
court determined? (03 Bar Q13)

A.

In complex crimes, the jurisdiction of the court is
determined by the penalty prescribed for the more
serious crime in its maximum period. This is pursuant
to Article 48 of the Revised Penal Code which provides
for such a penalty for complex crimes. [See Cuyos v.
Garcia, 160 SCRA 302 (1988)]

Q.

Mario, a resident of Quezon City, sued for libel the

editor, publisher and columnist of Ang Bagong
Pilipino, a newspaper of general circulation, with
principal office at Binondo, Manila. He claimed that
because his reputation had been badly besmirched
by the offensive article he suffered damages
estimated at Pt million. The case was filed before
the Regional Trial Court of Quezon City.

The accused moved to quash the Information
on the ground that the RTC had no jurisdiction to
try the case considering that under Sec. 2 of R.A.
7691, Metropolitan Trial Courts exercise exclusive
original jurisdiction over all offenses punishable
with imprisonment not exceeding six years (of
which libel is one) irrespective of the amount of
fine, accessory or other penalties or civil liability
arising from the offense. The accused also claimed
that the offensive article was printed and first published
in Manila so that the case should have been filed
with the Metropolitan Trial Court of Manila.
Decide. Discuss fully. (95 Bar 06).
A.

The motion to quash the Information should be denied.

The ground that the Metropolitan Trial Courts
exercise exclusive original jurisdiction since the penalty of
imprisonment did not exceed six years is without merit
295

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
The Supreme Court has held that the jurisdictior

of the Regional Trial Court over libel cases, as
provided under Article 360 of the Revised Penal
Code, has not been affected by RR.A, 7691, (Arambulo
v. Laqui, 12 October 2000).
The ground that the offensive article was printed
and first published in Manila so that the case should

have been fled with the Metropolitan Trial Court of
Manila is also without merit.
Under Article 360 of the Revised Penal Code, in

case of libel against a private complainant, the
criminal action may also be filed with the RTC where

any of the offended parties actually resides at the time
of the commission of the offense.
Here the private complainant Mario, a Quezon

City resident, may safely be presumed to have resided
in Quezon City at the time of the commission of the

offense, In the absence of any contrary Indication.
Hence the venue was properly laid in Quezon City
Q.

Informations for rape were filed with the RTC
against the petitioner Datu Malingin charging him
with having carnal knowledge of a 14-year-old minor
AAA through force and Intimidation. Petitioner
filed a motion to quash on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction. He averred that he was a member of
an indigenous group. According to him, pursuant
to Sections 65 and 66, Republic Act No. (RA) 8371

or the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act, the criminal
cases filed against him should be resolved first
through the customary law and practices of the
Indigenous group he belonged to and thereafter,
the issues must be referred to the National
Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP). Should
the motion to quash be granted?
296

PRELIMINARIES

A.

No. RA 8371 does not serve as a bar for criminal
prosecution because crime is an offense against
society. The intention of our laws to protect the indigenous
peoples does not include the deprivation of courts of
their jurisdiction over criminal cases. Penal laws apply
to individuals without regard to membership in an
indigenous group. (Datu Malingin v. Sandagan, 12
October 2020, nting, 4.)

Q.

May injunction lie to restrain criminal prosecution?

A.

The general rule is that writs of prohibition or injunction
are not available to restrain criminal prosecution. The
exceptions are the following:
1)

When necessary to protect the constitutional rights
of the accused

2) When necessary for the orderly administration of
justice orto avoid oppression or multiplicity of actions.

3) When there is a prejudicial question which is sub judice
4)

When the acts of the officer are without or in
excess of authority.

5) When the prosecution is under an invalid law or
regulation.
6) When there is double jeopardy.

7) When the court has no jurisdiction over the offense.
8) When it is a case of persecution rather than
prosecution.
9) When the charges are manifestly false and
motivated by the lust for vengeance.
10) When there is clearly no prima facie case against
the accused and a motion to quash on that
ground has been denied.
(Brocka v. Enrile, 192 SCRA 183).

297

RULE 110. PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES
Q.

What is criminal procedure?

A.

Criminal procedure is that branch of remedial law
which provides for the procedure for the apprehension,

prosecution, and trial of persons accused of any crime.
Q.

How are the rules of criminal procedure construed?

A.

The rules shall be liberally construed in favor of the

accused and strictly construed against the State in
order to level the playing field between the accused
who is up against the awesome machinery of the State.
Q.

How are criminal actions instituted?

A.

Criminal actions shall be instituted as follows:

For offenses where a preli
investigation is required
inary
m

By filing the complaint with the proper officer for
the purpose of preliminary investigation
For offenses where a preliminary investigation is
not required

By filing the complaint or information directly with
the municipal trial court and municipal circuit trial
courts or by filing the complaint with the office of the
prosecutor,
In Manila and other chartered cities, the complaint
shall be filed with the office of the prosecutor unless
otherwise provided in their charters, (S1 R110)

298

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

What is the effect of the institution of the criminal
action?

A.

It shall interrupt the running of the prescriptive period
of the offense charged unless otherwise provided in
speclal laws. (S1 R110). The period of prescription shall

commence to run from the day on which the crime is

discovered by the offended party, the authorities, or
their agents, and shall be interrupted by the filing
of the complaint or information. (Art. 91, Revised

Penal Code).
Q.

The

accused

was

charged

with

violating

a

municipal ordinance by quarrying without a permit
on 11 May 1990 in Rodriguez, Rizal. A complaint
was filed by the police with the prosecutor's office
on 30 May 1990 but the corresponding information
was filed with the municipal trial court only on 2
October 1990. The accused filed a motion to
quash on the ground of prescription, pointing out
that under Act No. 3326, violations penalized by
ordinances shall prescribe after two months from
the commission of the offense and the Information
was filed in court after more than 60 days from its
commission, The prosecution on the other hand
argued that the filing of the complaint with the
prosecutor's office interrupted the running of the
prescriptive period pursuant to S1 Rt10 of the
Rules of Criminal Procedure. Should the motion
to quash be granted?
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court en banc held that the crime
had prescribed since the information was filed in court
only on 2 October 1990 or more than two months
from the commission of the offense on 11 May 1990.
Violations of municipal ordinances are covered by the
Rule on Summary Procedure and not by S1 R110. A
perusal of Section 9 of the Rule on Summary

299

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Procedure"

reveals

that the

criminal

case

is

commenced only upon the filing of the complaint or

information in court. Hence the running of the
prescriptive period shall be halted on the date the
case is actually filed in court and not on any date
before that.
This interpretation is also in consonance Act No.

3326 which governs the prescriptive period for
violations of special laws and ordinances, Under
Section 2 of this act, the period of prescription shall
be suspended "when proceedings are instituted against

the guilty party." The proceedings referred to in
Section 2 thereof are "judicial proceedings." (Zaldivis
v. Reyes, 211 SCRA 277 [1992])
Q.

Tongson issued checks In favor of Panaguiton.
When presented for payment, the checks were
dishonored on 18 March 1993 for insufficiency of
funds. Demands for payment by Panaguiton went
unheeded. On 24 August 1995, Panaguition filed a
complaint for violation of B.P. Big, 22 against
Tongson before the Quezon City Prosecutor's
Office. In 1999, the Prosecutor's Office dismissed
Panaguiton's complaint on the ground that the
action had already prescribed pursuant to Act No.
3326 which provides that violations of special
laws which do not provide for their own prescriptive
periods shall prescribe in four years unless
interrupted by the institution of judicial proceedings.
According to the Prosecutor's Office, since it was
more than four years from 18 March 1993 and the
information had not yet been filed in court, the
criminal action had already prescribed. Was the
prosecution for violation of B.P, Blg. 22 barred by
prescription?
"Now Section 11 of the 1991 Revised FRules on Summary Procedure.

300

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

A.

No, the prosecution for violation of B.P. Blg. 22 was
not barred by prescription.
The Supreme Court held that the filing of the
complaint with the prosecutor's office already tolled
the running of the prescriptive period even if the
offense is for the violation of a special law. The
Supreme Court held that the word "proceedings " in
Section 2 of Act No. 3326 by which prescription is
interrupted should be deemed to refer to proceedings
both judicial or executive in character. It pointed out

that when Act No. 3326 was passed in 1926,
preliminary investigation of criminal offenses was conducted
by justices of the peace, thus, the phraseology in the
law, "institution of judicial proceedings for its
investigation and punishment," and the prevailing rule
at the time was that once a complaint is filed with the
justice of the peace for preliminary investigation, the

prescription of the offense is halted. (Panaguiton v,
Department of Justice, 571 SCRA 549 [2008]).
Here the complaint was filed in 1995 with the
prosecutor's office. Hence the prescriptive period
was interrupted by such filing.

The ruling in Panaguion
t was reiterated in People
v. Pangilinan, 672 SCRA 105 (2012).°

n submitted that the Panagurton and Pangilinan rulings should apply
only to violations of special laws not covered by the Revised Rules on Summary
Procedure. For crimina' cases covered by the Revised Rules on Summary
Procedure, the Zaldivia rut.ng should still prevat, pursuant to S11 of the RRS.
Thus the prescriptive period for the crime of slight ohysical irjures would be
interrupted oniy by the fling of the complaint or the information in court. It should
be noted that at the times materiel to Panagurton and Pangilinan, violations of
BP Big. 22were not yet covered by the RRSP. The coverage of the RRSP was
extended 10 BP Blg 22 cases only on 15 Apr! 2003. R is subrritted that
because of this, the Panaguiton and Pangilinan rulings are no longer good case
law and hence the prescriptive period for violations of B.P Blg 22 is interruotea
only upon the fling of the case in court

301

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

On 17 May 2003 Respondent parked his car in a
no-parking zone in Baguio City. Petitioner Jadewell
Parking Systems put clamps on the Respondent's
wheel in order to immobilize his car. Respondent
removed the clamps and drove away with them.
On 23 May 2003 Petitioner filed a complaintaffidavit for robbery with the prosecutor's office
against Respondent. After preliminary investigation,
the Prosecutor found probable cause for violation
of Baguio City Ordinance No. 003-2000 (rather
than robbery) against the Respondent and filed
the information with the MTC of Baguio City on 2
October 2003. Respondent filed a motion to quash
on the ground of extinction of the criminal liability,
pointing out that under Act No. 3326, violations
penalized by municipal ordinances shall prescribe
after two months from the commission of the
offense. The prosecution countered that the filing
of the complaint with the prosecutor's office
already Interrupted the period of prescription
pursuant to S1 R110. Should the motion to quash
be granted?

A.

Yes. A criminal case involving the violation of a
municipal or city ordinance is governed by the Rules
on Summary Procedure. As provided in the Revised
Rules on Summary Procedure, only the filing of a
complaint or information in court tolls the prescriptive
period where the crime charged the violation of an
ordinance. The ruling in Zaldivila v. Reyes is applicable.
Since the information was filed with the court after the
lapse of two months from the commission of the
offense, then the criminal action was extinguished by
prescription, (Jadewell Parking Systems Corp. v.
Lidua, G.R. No. 169588, 7 October 2013)

302

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

The court in Jadewell distinguished the facts of
the case from People v. Pangilinan, 672 SCRA 105
t v. Department of Justice, 571
(2012), and Panaguion
SCRA 549 (2008), which involved the violation of a
special law, i.e,, B.P. Blg. 22.
Q.

On21 February 1990, Enrique Magno was stabbed
on the right arm by Armando Reyes at Balara,

Quezon City. A complaint for slight physical
injuries was filed against Reyes with the office of
the City Prosecutor on 28 February 1990 as the
injuries required 5 days of medical attendance.
The information for slight physical injuries was
filed on 12 May 1990 with the Quezon City
Metropolitan Trial Court Reyes moved to quash
the information on the ground of prescription as it
was filed on the 80" day, whereas the prescriptive
period for slight physical injuries is 60 days.
Should the motion to quash be granted? Decide
with reasons. (90 Bar Q13).
A.

The motion to quash should be granted, The Supreme
Court has held that in criminal cases governed by the
Revised Rules on Summary Procedure, the prescriptive
period would be interrupted not by the filing of the
complaint with the prosecutor's office but by the filing
of the information in court, (Zaldivia v. Reyes, 211
SCRA 277 [1992]; Jadewell Parking Systems Corp. v.
LIdua, 706 SCRA 724 [20131).
Here the offense involved is slight physical
injuries which is covered by the Revised Rules on
Summary Procedure, since the penalty thereof does
not exceed six months or a fine of P1,000. Hence the

Tie distinction can no longer be drawn because violations f B.P Bl 22
are now covered by the Revlgad Rule on Summary Procedure

303

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
offense of slight physical injuries had prescribed since
the information was filed in court more than 60 days
after its commission."
Q.

A complaint for violation of RA 7877 (Anti-Sexual
Harassment Law) against a public officer was filed

with the Ombudsman. When is the prescriptive
period tolled? Upon the filing of the complaint
with the Ombudsman or upon the filing of the
complaint with the court?
A.

Upon the filing of the complaint with the 0MB. The
prescriptive period for the violation of a special law is
interrupted once the complaint is filed with the
investigating prosecutor or officer. (People v. Lee, 16
September 2019, Peralta, J.).

Q.

Who can prosecute criminal actions?

A.

All criminal actions commenced by a complaint or
information shall be prosecuted under the direction
and control of the public prosecutor. (S5 R110).

0.

May a private lawyer prosecute a criminal case?

A.

Yes a private lawyer (i.e., a private prosecutor) may
prosecute a criminal case in the following situations:
a)

When the civil action for recovery of the civil
liability is instituted in the criminal action pursuant
to R111, the offended party may intervene by
counsel in the prosecution of the offense. (S16
R110). Nevertheless the private prosecutor must

+

People v. Bautista, G.R. No. 108641, 27 Apri. 2007 (3 p.),a case
involving slight physical injuries, the Supreme Court held tat the running of the
prescriptive period was tolled by the fifing of the complaint with the prosecutor's
off.ce. The ruling, which did not tae into account the Zaldlvia doctrine and the
Revised Rules pn Summary Procedure, is arguable. The Zeldivie doctrine cannot
be modified or reversed except by the court sitting en bonc. {Sec. 4[] Art. VI'I,
Constitution),

304

RULE110
Prosecution of Offenses

be under the direction and control of the public
prosecutor who hence must be present during
the proceedings.

b)

In case of heavy work schedule of the public
prosecutor or in the event of lack of public prosecutors,
the private prosecutor may be authorized in writing
by the Chief of the Prosecution Office or the
Regional State Prosecutor to prosecute the case

subject to the approval of the court. Once so
authorized, the private prosecutor shall continue

to prosecute the case up to the end of the trial
even in the absence of the public prosecutor,

unless the authority is revoked or otherwise
withdrawn. (35 R110)
Q.

When is the issuance of the written authority in
favor of the private prosecutor mandatory?

A.

In cases where only the civil

liability

is being

prosecuted by a private prosecutor, the head of the
prosecution office must issue in favor of the private
prosecutor a written authority to try the case even in

the absence of the public prosecutor. The written
authority must be submitted to the court prior to the
presentation of evidence by the private prosecutor in

accordance with S5 R110. (Revised Guidelines for
Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
Q.

Jeffrey "Jennifer" Laude was killed In Olongapo
City by US Marine Lance Corporal Joseph Scott
Pemberton. Pursuant to the Visiting Forces Agreement,

Pemberton was detained in Camp Aguinaldo.
Marilou S. Laude, Jeffrey's sister, filed an Urgent
Motion to Compel the Armed Forces of the
Philippines to Surrender Custody of Accused to
the Olongapo City Jail. The motion did not contain

305

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
the written conformity of the Public Prosecutor
and for that reason was denied by the RTC of
Olongapo City. Was the denial correct?

A.

Yes. S5 R1f0 provides that all criminal actions shall
be prosecuted under the direction and control of the
public prosecutor. In criminal cases, the People is the
real party in interest, which means allowing a private
complainant to pursue a criminal action on his own is
a rare exception. The duty and authority to prosecute
the criminal aspects of this case, including the

custody issue, are duly lodged in the Public Prosecutor,
(Laude v. Ginez-Jabalde, 24 November 2015, e.b.,
Leonen, J.),
Q.

What are private crimes?

A.

Private crimes are those which cannot be prosecuted
de oficio. Otherwise put they cannot be prosecuted
except upon a complaint filed by the offended party
In private crimes, the law confers upon the offended
party a choice to protect his or her privacy rather than
suffering the embarassment or stigma of a trial.

0.

What are the private crimes?

A.

The following are the private crimes. (CASAL D)
1)

Concubinage.

2) Adultery.
3) Seduction.
4) Abduction.
5)

6)

Acts of Lasciviousness.
Defamation which consists of the imputation of

any of the above offenses. (S5 R110).
306

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

ls the complaint by the offended party required to
be sworn to or under oath?

A.

While it is desirable that the complaint be sworn to or
under oath pursuant to S3 R110 and S3(a) R112,
nothing in the wordings of Article 344 of the Revised
Penal Code and S5 R112 requires the complaint to be
sworn to. The complaint mentioned in S5 R110 should
be given a liberal rather than a strict interpretation.
The overriding consideration in determining compliance
with the requirement Is the Intent and determination of
the offended party to seek judicial redress. In a case
the Supreme Court did not disregard the victim's
salaysay for mere lack of an oath for that would
amount to suppressing her anguished cry for redress.
(People v Sangi,l 208 SCRA 696 [1992]

a.

If the prosecution of the above crimes was made
by an information filed by the prosecutor rather
than by a complaint by the offended party, may
the information be quashed? If so, on what ground?

A.

Yes the Information may be quashed on the ground of
lack of jurisdiction of the court. This is because in
private crimes, the offended party's complaint is
jurisdictional by virtue of Article 344 of the Revised
Penal Code and S5 R110 of the Rules of Court;
without the offended party's complaint, the court will
not acquire jurisdiction to try the case. (People v.
Palabas, G.R. No. L-8827, 31 August 1954; People v.
Santos, 101 Phil. 798; People v. Zurban0, G.R. No.L32673; see 2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 203-205 [6 rev. ed.))

307

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

0.

State the rule in the prosecution of the crimes of
adultery and concubinage.

A.

Adultery and concubinage shall not be prosecuted
except upon a complaint filed by the offended spouse.
The offended party cannot institute criminal prosecution
without including the guilty parties, if both are alive,
nor, in any case, If the offended party has consented
to the offense or pardoned the offenders. (S5 R110)

Q.

Efraim filed with the office of the prosecutor a
complaint-affidavit against his wife Cecile and
her paramour Avelino. After the preliminary
investigation, the prosecutor filed an information

for adultery against Cecile and Avelino. Cecile
and Avelino filed a motion to quash on the ground
of lack of jurisdiction of the court since the case
was not prosecuted upon a complaint filed by the
offended spouse but upon an information filed by
the prosecutor. Should the motion to quash be granted?

A.

The motion to quash should not be granted, The
complalnt mentioned In S5 R110 should be given a
liberal rather than a strict interpretation; hence it
refers not only to the complaint mentioned in S3 R110
but also to the complaint-affidavit filed before the
prosecutor under S3(a) R112, The overriding consideration
in determining compliance with the requirement is the
intent and determination of the offended party to seek
judicial redress. (People v. Ilarde, 125 SCRA 11
[1983]; People v. Sangil, 208 SCRA 696 [1992]).
Where the offended party's complaint is not
attached to the information, the same should be
produced as evidence by the prosecution or upon
court order pursuant to S7 R112. This is because the
records of the preliminary investigation do not form
part of the record of the case.

308

RULE 110
Prosecutlon of Offenses

Q.

The sworn statement of the offended party
charging the accused with abduction was signed
by her In the office of the chief of police. The chief
of police then filed the complaint-affidavit with the
office of the prosecutor who after preliminary
investigation filed the information. The accused
filed a motion to quash on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction assailing both the complaint of the
chief of police and the information filed by the
assistant provincial prosecutor as being insufficient
to confer jurisdiction upon the court, Should the
motion to quash be granted?

A.

No. The complaint mentioned in S5 R110 should be
given a liberal rather than a strict interpretation. The
overriding consideration in determining compliance
with the requirement is the intent and determination of
the offended party to seek judicial redress. Here the
sworn statement of the victim hardly can cast doubt
on her evident resolve to bring the accused to justice.
(People v. Ilarde, 125 SCRA 11 [1983; People v
Sangil, 208 SCRA 696 [1992])

Q.

What is the crime of adultery?

A.

Adultery is the crime committed by any married
woman who shall have sexual intercourse with a man
not her husband and by the man who has carnal
knowledge of a married woman knowing her to be
married, even if the marriage be subsequently declared
void. (Article 333, Revised Penal Code)

Q

What is the crime of concubinage?

A.

Concubinage is the crime committed by any husband
who shall keep a mistress in the conjugal dwelling, or
shall have sexual intercourse, under scandalous
circumstances, with a woman who is not his wife, or
shall cohabit with her in any other place

309

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

The concubine shall suffer the penalty of destierro.
(Article 334, Revised Penal Code).

a.

Husband 1 of Wife 1 is having an affair with Wife 2
of Husband 2. Both Husband 1 and Wife 2 are aware
of each other's married status. Wife 1 wants to file
a criminal complaint for adultery. May she file the
complaint against Wife 2 only?

A.

No. In fact Wife 1 cannot file the complaint as she is
not the offended party The offended spouse in adultery
is the husband of the adulterous woman. (See Article
333, Revised Penal Code). The cuckolded husband
may choose to suffer the ignominity in silence rather
than bringing a public prosecution. The wife of the
adulterous man is not an offended party. This can be
gleaned from the fact that adultery cannot arise if the
woman having sex with a married man is unmarried.

Q.

Same facts as above except that it will be
Husband 2 who will be filing the criminal complaint
for adultery. Can Husband 2 file the complaint
against Husband 1 only?

A,

No. Husband 2, the offended spouse, must include both
guilty parties. Hence Husband 2, if he wants to file the
complaint, must include both Wife 2 and Husband 1

Q.

Magdalena Campos, a married woman and
Santiago Mendoza, a married man, were indicted
for adultery in an information filed by the Prosecutor
of Bataan upon a sworn complaint filed by Mrs.
Cynthia Mendoza, wife of Santiago. Both accused
filed a motion to quash alleging that the trial court
has not acquired jurisdiction over the case because
no complaint has been filed by the husband of
Magdalena Campos. They cite Section 5, Rule 110
of the Revised Rules of Court which provides,

310

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

among others, that the crime of adultery "... shall
not be prosecuted except upon a complaint filed
by the offended spouse." How would you resolve
the motion to quash? (91 Bar Q128).
A.

1would grant the motion to quash.
Under Section 5 of Rule 110, the crime of
adultery shall not be prosecuted except upon a complaint
filed by the offended spouse.

Here the one who filed the complaint was the

wife of Santiago. The offended spouse in adultery is
not her but the husband of Magdalena. (See Article 333,
Revised Penal Code; U.S. v. Asuncion, 22 Phil, 358)
Hence the court did not acquire jurisdiction over the case.
Note: The UP Law Center Committee gives an

alternative answer wherein Mrs. Mendoza would be
considered an offended party. For the considerations
stated above, it is believed that this alternative answer
is not correct.

0.

Petitioner was the former head of the HRR
department of Standard Chartered Bank ($CB).
He bought the so-called "Global Third Party Mutual
Funds" (GTPMF) from SCB wherein he invested
US$8,000. His investment however depreciated to
US$3,000, Subsequently Petitioner learned that
SCB had offered for sale and sold the GTPMF
without registering the same first as securities
with the SEC. Petitioner then filed with the DOJ a
complaint for violation of Section 8.1 of the SRC.
The DOJ dismissed the petitioner's complaint
holding that it should have been filed with the
SEC. Was the dismissal correct?

311

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

Yes. The prosecution of complaints for violation of
special laws shall be governed by the provisions
thereof. (S5 R110). Under Sec. 53,1 of the Securities
Regulation Code, a criminal complaint for violation of
any law or rule administered by the SEC must first be
filed with it. If the SEC finds that there is probable
cause, then it should refer the case to the DOJ, A

criminal charge for the violation of the SRC is a
specialized dispute. Hence it must first be referred to
an administrative agency of special competence, i.e.,
the SEC. Under the doctrine of primary jurisdiction, a

court will not determine a controversy involving a
question within the jurisdiction of the administrative
tribunal, where the question demands the exercise of

sound administrative discretion requiring the specialized
knowledge and expertise of said administrative
tribunal to determine technical and intricate matters of
fact. (Baviera v. Paglinawan, G.R No. 168380, 8
February 2007).
Q.

May the offended party intervene in the criminal
action?

A.

Yes, the offended party may intervene by counsel in
the prosecution of the offense if the civil action for
recovery of civil liability is instituted in the criminal
action. (S16 R110).

Q.

Prosecution of X for the murder of Y, At the bail
hearings, the prosecution was scheduled to present
9 witnesses to prove the strong guilt of the
accused. The RTC judge however insisted on
terminating the proceedings after the fifth witness
had been presented. Subsequently the RTC granted
the application of X for bail. Alleging grave abuse
of discretion, Z (Y's father) filed a special civil

312

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

action for certiorari with the Court of Appeals. The
Court of Appeals dismissed the petition on the
ground that Z has no personality to file the petition
without the imprimatur of the Solicitor General.
a)

Did the' Court of Appeals act correctly in
dismissing the case?

b) Would your answer be the same if the judge
had allowed the prosecution to present the 9
witnesses before rendering its order granting
the bail?

A
a)

No. While the rule is only the Solicitor General
may bring or defend actions on behalf of the
Republic of the Philippines, or represent the
People or the State in criminal proceedings pending
in the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal,

the ends of substantial justice would be better
served, and the issues in the action could be
determined in a more just, speedy and inexpensive
manner, by entertaining the petition. As an
offended party in a criminal case, Z has sufficient
personality and a valid grievance against the RTC's
order granting bail to the alleged murderer of his
father. The offended parties in criminal cases have
sufficient interest and personality as "person(s)
aggrieved' to file the special civil action of
prohibition and certiorari under Sections 1 and 2
of Rule 65 in line with the underlying spirit of the
liberal construction of the Rules of Court in order
to promote their object. (People v. Calo, 186

SCRA 620)

The complainant has such an

re

statement in People v. Dacudao, GR. No. 81389, 21 February
1989, that a prvate offended party has no standing to challenge the grant of bail
ina special clvl action for certiorari was only an obiter dictum since the Supreme
Court thats.n actua'ly too cognizance of the petition filed by the offended party.

313

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
interest in the civil aspect of the case that he may
file a special civil action questioning the decision
or action of the respondent court on Jurisdictional
grounds. In so doing, complainant should not
bring the action in the name of the People of
the Philippines. He should do so and prosecute it
in his name as such complainant. (Rodriguez v.
Gadiane, G.R. NO. 152903, 17 July 2006)
The RTC judge's order was null and void for the
judge acted with grave abuse of discretion amounting
to lack of jurisdiction in terminating the proceedings
prematurely His order was null and void for violation
of procedural due process. (People v. Calo, supra)
No, my answer would not be the same. In such a
case the Court of Appeals wouid have correctly
dismissed the petition since we apply the general
rule that the one who should represent the People
in criminal proceedings before the Supreme Court
and the Court of Appeal is the Office of the
Solicitor General. (See Heirs of Burgos v. Court
of Appeals, 8 February 2010)
In Narciso v. Sta. Romana-Cruz, 385 Phil. 208

(2000) this Court al'owed the offended party to
challenge before it the trial court's order granting bail.
But in that case, the trial court gravely abused its
discretion amountirg to lack of jurisdiction in granting

bail without conducting any hearing at all. Thus, to
disallow the appeal on the basis of lack of intervention
of the OSG would "leave the private complainant
without any recourse to rectify the public injustice.
It is not the case here. The trial court took time to
hear the parade of witnesses that the prosecution
presented before reaching the conclusion that the
evidence of guilt was not strong.

314

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

Q

The petitioner and his wife Marinel Salvador were
charged in the RTC with estafa under Article 315
of the Revised Penal Code. On 30 March 2011, the
date scheduled for the promulgation of the
judgment, their counsel moved for the deferment
of the promulgation inasmuch as the petitioner was
allegedly suffering from hypertension. Unconvinced
of the reason, the RTC proceeded to promulgate
its decision convicting the Petitioner and his wife
and sentencing them to Imprisonment of 4 years
and two months of prision correctional to 20
years of reclusion temporal.
The RTC then Issued a warrant for the
petitioner's arrest. He was apprehended on 7 April
2011, or eight days from the promulgation of the
judgment finding him guilty. The petitioner filed
his Motion for Leave to file Notice of Appeal dated
13 April 2011, and attached thereto the medical
certificate dated 30 March 2011 purportedly issued
by Dr. Paulo Miguel A. David, certifying that the
petitioner had submitted himself to a medical
consultation at the Rizal Medical Center on 30
March 2011 and had been found to be suffering
from hypertension. The prosecution opposed the
motion attaching the affidavit of Dr. David stating
that he never examined the petitioner and that he
never issued the medical certificate dated 30
March 2011. The RTC nonetheless granted Petitioner's
motion and gave due course to the Petitioner's
appeal, The Respondent, who was the offended
party, filed a petition for certiorari with the Court
of Appeals to set aside the RTC's order granting
Petitioner's motion for leave to file notice of
appeal. The Petitioner argues that the Respondent
has no legal standing to assail the RT's order as

315

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

it Is only the Office of the Solicitor General who
can represent the People in proceedings before
the CA and the SC. Did the Respondent have legal
standing to assail the RTC's order?
A.

Yes. The Court has stressed that the People of the
Philippines, being the real party in interest in every
criminal proceedings, can be represented only by the
OSG in criminal proceedings in the CA or in the SC
Yet, this rule admits of exceptions. A special civil
action for certiorari may be filed by an aggrieved party
alleging grave abuse of discretion amounting to

excess or lack of jurisdiction on the part of the trial
court. The term "aggrieved parties" includes the State
and the private offended party or complainant.

There was grave abuse of discretion on the part
of the RTC since Its order giving due course to
Petitioner's appeal was in clear violation of S6 R120
which requires that the accused's failure to appeal
during the promulgation was with justifiable cause and
that the accused should prove such justifiable cause.
Here the certification purportedly issued by Dr. David
was proved to be spurious. (Salvador v. Chua, 15 July
2015, Bersamin, J.).
Q.

Petitioner was the private complainant In a
criminal case for estafa through falsification of
public documents filed against the Respondent.
Petitioner averred that the Respondent falsified
his signature in a deed of sale of land and was
able to cancel Petitioner's title and obtain a new
title in Respondent's name In 1998. Prior to
arraignment, Respondent filed a motion to quash
on the ground of prescription which was granted
by the RTC. The RTC held that the prescriptive
period for the alleged crime commenced from the
time Petitioner had constructive notice of the
316

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

alleged falsification, ie., when the document was
registered with the Register of Deeds on 1 April
1998. Therefore, since more than 10 years had
elapsed when the information was filed in 2013,
the subject crime had prescribed, Petitioner's
motion for reconsideration was denied. Petitioner
filed with the Court of Appeals a special civil
action challenging the quashal and moving that
the case against the Respondent be reinstated.
May the Court of Appeals take cognizance of the
petition for certiorari?
A.

No. If there is a dismissal of a criminal case by the
trial court or if there is an acquittal of the accused, it is

only the OSG that may bring an appeal on the
criminal aspect representing the People. The private
complainant or the offended party may, however, file
an appeal without the intervention of the OSG but
only insofar as the civil liability of the accused is
concerned. He may also file a special civil action for
certiorari even without the intervention of the OSG,
but only to the end of preserving his interest in the
civi I aspect of the case.
Here Petitioner's petition for certiorari sought for
the reinstatement of the Information and/or a ruling
that the crime has not yet prescribed Accordingly, the
same was not intended to merely preserve his interest
in the civil aspect of the case. Thus, as his certiorari
petition was filed seeking for relief/s in relation to the
criminal aspect of the case, it is necessary that the
same be filed with the authorization of the OSG,
which, by law, is the proper representative of the
People, the real party in interest in the criminal
proceedings. There being no authorization given, the
certiorari petition was rightfully dismissed, (Burgos v.
Naval, 8 June 2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

317

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

If a criminal case is dismissed by the trial court or
if there is an acquittal, may the private offended
party appeal from such dismissal?

A.

No If the criminal case is dismissed by the trial court
or if there is an acquittal, the appeal on the criminal
aspect of the case must be instituted by the Solicitor
General in behalf of the State. The capability of the
private complainant to question such dismissal or
acquittal is limited only to the civil aspect of the case.
(Rodriguez v. Gadiane, supra)

Q.

An Information for libel was filed against accused
for putting up a website allegedly defaming the
Yuchengco family. The Regional Trial Court quashed
the criminal information for libel and dismissed
the case for lack of jurisdiction, holding that the
criminal information failed to allege where the
article was printed and first published or where
the offended parties reside. The People of the
Philippines, through the private prosecutors, and
with the conformity of public prosecutor filed a Notice
of Appeal to the Court of Appeals. The CA dismissed
the appeal on the ground that the Office of the
Solicitor General had not given its conformity to
the said appeal. Was the dismissal proper?

A.

Yes, The CA correctly dismissed the notice of appeal
Interposed by petitioners against the order of the RTC
because they, being mere private complainants,
lacked the legal personality to appeal the dismissal of
the criminal case, It is well-settled that the authority
to represent the State in appeals of criminal cases
before the Supreme Court and the CA is vested solely
in the 0SG which is the law office of the Government.
(Malayan Insurance Co. v. Piccio, 6 August 2014)

318

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

Criminal complaints for falsification of commercial
documents were filed in the RTC upon complaint
of the POIC against the respondent bank officers.
Trial was delayed allegedly due to the fault of the
prosecution. Respondents filed a motion to
dismiss on the ground of violation of their right to
a speedy trial which was denied. This prompted
them to file a petition for certiorari before the
Court of Appeals docketed as CA-G.R. SP No.
108319. A copy of said petition was served,
however, only on the private complainant, le., the
PDIC, and not the People of the Philippines (the
People), through the Office of the Solicitor General
(0SG), as it was not even impleaded as party to
the case. In a Decision dated September 28, 2011,
the CA annulled and set aside the assailed orders
of the RTC, and consequently dismissed the
criminal cases against respondents. Did the CA
act correctly in annulling and setting aside the
RTC order?

A.

No. Respondents' certiorari petition in CA-G.R. SP
No. 108319 that sought the dismissal of the criminal
cases against them should not have been resolved by
the CA, without the People, as represented by the
0SG, having first been impleaded. This stems from
the recognition that the People is an indispensable
party to the proceedings. While the failure to implead
an Indispensable party Is not per se a ground for the
dismissal of an action, considering that said party may
still be added by order of the court, on motion of the
party or on its own initiative at any stage of the action
and/or such times as are just, It remains essential
as it is jurisdictional -- that any indispensable party be
impleaded in the proceedings before the court renders
judgment, This is because the absence of such

319

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
indispensable party renders all subsequent actions of
the court null and void for want of authority to act, not
only as to the absent parties but even as to those
present. Consequently, the CA was directed to (a)
reinstate respondents' certiorari petition, and (b) order
said respondents to implead the People as a party to
the proceedings and thereby furnish its counsel, the
OSG, a copy of the aforementioned pleading. (People
v. Go, 24 September 2014)

0.

Define a complaint.

A.

A complaint Is a sworn written statement charging a
person with an offense, subscribed by the offended
party, any peace officer, or other public officer (OPP)
charged with the enforcement of the law violated. (S3

R110).
The complaint referred to in S3 R110 should not

be confused with the complaint filed with the
prosecutor under S3(a) R112. It refers to the complaint
filed directly with the MTC where preliminary investigation
is not required (S1lb] R110) and to the complaint filed
directly in court by the offended party or peace officer
where the accused was arrested without warrant and
an inquest prosecutor is unavailable (S6 R112).
Q.

Bankard is a credit card company engaged in
acquiring credit card receivables from merchants
arising from the purchase of goods and services
by credit card holders using credit cards issued
by banks, Including Solidbank. Solidbank brought
to the attention of Bankard questionable transactions
which were credited to the accused's Solidbank
credit card, allegedly reversal of charges from
merchants. It was found out that the transactions
were fictitious. Hence, Bankard was constrained
to pay the amount of the transactions to Solidbank

320

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

in the course of the settlement of the transactions

between Bankard and Solidbank. Bankard then
filed with the prosecutor's office a complaint for estafa
through false pretense under Article 315(2)(a) of

the Revised Penal Code against the accused. The
accused contended that the complaint against him
was not subscribed by the offended party which
is Solidbank, and that Bankard, not being the
offended party, has no personality to file the
complaint. Was the accused's contention correct?
A.

No. Firstly Bankard was also an offended party since

it was undeniable that it suffered damage as a result
of the false pretense of the accused, The offended
party in Article 315(2)(a) need not be the party against
wham the false pretense Is directed.
Secondly even assuming theat Bankard was not
an offended party, a complaint for purposes of preliminary
investigation by the prosecutor need not be filed by
the offended party but may be filed by any competent
person, unless the offense subject thereof cannot be
prosecuted de oficio. (Francisco v. People, G.R. No.
177720, 18 February 2009; Ebarle v. Sucaldito, 156
SCRA 803).
Q.

When is a complaint or information sufficient?
(DADAPO)

A.

A complaint or information is sufficient if it states the
name of the accused; the designation of the offense
given by the statute; the gcts or omissions complained
of as constituting the offense; the name of the gffended
party; the approximate date of the commission of the
offense; and the place where the offense was committed
(S6 R110).

321

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Is a prosecutor required to indicate in the information
the number and date of issue of his MCLE
Compllance Certificate? May the court dismiss
the information In case of failure to do so?

A.

Yes the prosecutor is required to do so since an
information is a pleadig.
n Nonetheless the court should
not dismiss the information but simply require the
investigating prosecutor to indicate the required information.
(People v. Arrojado, 9 November 2015, Peralta, J.).

Q.

How shall the complaint or information designate
the offense?

A.

The complaint or information shall state the designation
of the offense given by the statute, aver the acts or
omissions constituting the offense, and specify its
qualifying and aggravating circumstances. (DAQA). If
there is no designation of the offense, reference shall
be made to the section or subsection of the statute
punishing it. (S8 R110)

Q

What is the cause of the accusation?

A.

It is the acts or omissions constituting the offense as
well as the qualifying and aggravating circumstances.
(S9 R110)

0.

How must the cause of the accusatlon be alleged
in the complaint or information?

A.

The acts or omissions complained of as constituting
the offense and the qualifying and aggravating
circumstances must be stated in ordinary and concise
languagg and not necessarily in the language used in
the statute but in terms sufficient to enable a person
of common understanding to know what offense is
being charged as well as its qualifying and aggravating
circumstances and for the court to pronounce
judgment. (S9 R110),

322

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

The accused was charged with the violation of

Section 5(b) of R.A. 7610, which punishes those
who commit lascivious conduct with a child
subjected to sexual abuse, under an information
reading as follows:
That on or about 1995 up to June 2001 at
Gerona, Tarlac, and within the jurisdiction of this
Honorable Court, the above-named accused with

lewd design, did then and there willfully, unlawfully
and criminally commit acts of lasciviousness
upon the person of AAA, a minor subjected to
sexual abuse.

That accused is the stepfather of AAA who
was born on January 29, 1988.
May the accused be convicted of the crime
charged under such information?
A.

No. A reading of the allegations in the above-quoted
Information would show the insufficiency of the
averments of the acts alleged to have been committed
by appellant. It does not contain the essential facts
constituting the offense, but a statement of a conclusion
of law. Thus, appellant cannot be convicted of sexual
abuse under such Information. (People v. Pangiinan,
l
14 November 2011)

Q.

Police officer Roxas was charged with murder.
The information did not allege dwelling but the
same was proved during the trial. In imposing the
death penalty, the trial court appreciated the
aggravating circumstance of dwelling. Did the trial
court act properly in appreciating the aggravating
circumstance of dwelling?

323

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. S9 R110 of the 2000 Rules on Criminal Procedure
(effective 1 December 2000) states that the qualifying
and aggravating circumstances must be stated In the
information. Hence if not stated such circumstances
cannot be appreciated against the accused even if

proved, S9 R110 being a remedial law and being
favorable to the accused, the same can be applied
retroactively to pending cases. Thus the old rule that
generic aggravating circumstances even if not alleged
but proved during the trial may be appreciated has
already been superseded by S9 R110. The penalty of
death was thus modified to reclusion perpetua.
(People v. Roxas, G.R. No. 140762, 10 September
2003 [e.b.))

0.

PO2 Eduardo Valdez and his brother Edwin
Valdez were charged with three counts of murder
of the Sayson brothers. The information In each
count reads as follows:
That on or about the 1" day of March, 2000, in
Quezon City, Philippines, the above-named accused
conspiring together, confederating with and mutually
helping each other, with intent to kill, qualified

with treachery, did, then and there, willfully,
unlawfully and feloniously, assault, attack and
employ personal violence upon the person of one
FERDINAND SAYSON Y DABOCOL [etc] by then

and there shooting him with a gun, hitting him on
his head, thereby Inflicting upon him serious and
mortal wound which was the direct and immediate
cause of his death, to the damage and prejudice
of the heirs of the said FERDINAND SAYSON Y
DABOCOL [etc.].

324

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

The Valdez brothers were convicted of
murder by the RTC which conviction was affirmed
by the CA. The brothers appealed to the SC but
subsequently Edwin withdrew his appeal which
withdrawal was approved by the SC. May the
conviction of Eduardo for murder be reduced to
one for homicide?
A.

Yes, Eduardo's conviction for murder may be reduced
to one for homicide.

The State must specifically aver the factual
circumstances or particular acts that constitute the
criminal conduct or that qualify or aggravate the
liability for the crime in the interest of affording the
accused sufficient notice lo defend himself.
The averments of the informations to the effect
that the two accused "with intent to kill, qualified with
treachery did xxx assault, attack and employ personal
violence upon" the victims by then and there shooting
[them] with a gun, hitting [them]" on various parts of
their bodies "which [were] the direct and immediate
cause of [their] death[s]' did not sufficiently set forth
the facts and circumstances describing how treachery
attended each of the killings, Merely averring the
killing of a person by shooting him with a gun, without
more, did not show how the execution of the crime
was directly and specially ensured without risk to the
accused from the defense that the victim might make.
Indeed, the use of the gun as an instrument to kill was
not per se treachery, for there are other instruments
that could serve the same lethal purpose. Nor did the
use of the term treachery constitute a sufficient averment,
for that term, standing alone, was nothing but a
conclusion of law, not an averment of a fact. In short,

325

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

the particular acts and circumstances constituting
treachery as an attendant circumstance In murder
were missing from the informations. (People v. Valdez,
18 January 2012, Bersamin, 4.).

0.

An Information was filed against Rolando and
Mark Kenneth Solar for the murder of Joseph Doe,
the accusatory portion of which reads:
That on or about the g" day of March 2008, in
the City of Las Piias, Philippines and within the
jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the abovenamed accused, conspiring and confederating
together and both of them mutually helping and
aiding each other, without justifiable motive, with
Intent to kifl and with treachery and abuse of
superior strength, did then and there knowingly,
unlawfully and feloniously attack, assault and use
personal violence upon one JOSEPH DOE, by
then and there hitting and beating his head with a

baseball bat, thereby inflicting upon the latter
mortal injury which caused his death.
The killing of the aforesaid victim is qualified
by the circumstances of treachery and abuse of
superior strength.
During the arraignment, Rolando pleaded not
guilty while Mark Kenneth remained at large and
hence was not brought to the RTC's jurisdiction.
Rolando was convicted of murder by the RTC. He
appealed to the CA which affirmed the finding
that Rolando killed Joseph but downgraded his
conviction to homicide. Did the CA act correctly in
downgrading Rolando's conviction to homicide?

"pule submitted that the downgrading cf Eduardo's conviction from rurder to
homicide should also have benefited Ewin even if he wthrew his appeal since
the SC's judgment is favorable and applicable to him (See S11[a] R122

326

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

A.

No. Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, a ground
for quashal ls waived if not raised in the motion

to quash.
Here, the failure of the information to specifically
allege facts relative to treachery is a ground for
quashal, that is, that the information does not conform

substantially to the required form. Rolando did not
raise this ground in the motion to quash. Hence, he is
deemed to have waived such ground for quashal and
thus his conviction may not be reduced to one for homicide.
(People v. Solar, 6 August 2019, e.b., Caguioa, J.)
Q.

Petitioner was charged with qualified theft in an
information which alleged that the crime was
committed "sometime in the month of October
2001." The proof adduced during the trlal showed
that the crime was committed in November 2001.
Was the Petitioner's right to be informed of the
nature and the cause of the accusation against
him violated?

A

No. The information did not have to state the precise
date when the offense was committed, as to be
inclusive of the month of "November 2001" since the
date was not a material element of the offense. As
such, the offense of qualified theft could be alleged to
be committed on a date as near as possible to the
actual date of its commission. Clearly, the month of
November is the month right after October. (Zapanta
v. People, 20 March 2013, Brion, J.).

-

The Solar tolding modified the holding in People v. Valdez, 18 January
2012, that the failure to specifically allege treachery meant that the nformation
did not charge the crime of murder and is thus a defect which could be raised

ever after plea or on appeal

327

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

The accused were charged with estafa under
Article 315(1)(b) of the Revised Penal Code under
an lnfonnatlon charging them as follows:

That on or about November 15, 2005, in Pasig
City and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable
Court, the above-named accused, conspiring and
confederating together and helping one another,

did

then

and there

willfuly,

unlawfully

and

feloniously defraud Fung Hing Kit in the following
manner, to wit: the said accused, with abuse of
confidence, induced Fung Hing Kit to invest at
Gen-Portal, and the latter invested and in fact
deposited the amount of 9.5 Million Pesos Into the
account of iGen-Portal, once in possession of said
amount, the said accused, with abuse of confidence,
misappropriated, misapplied and converted the
said amount to their own and personal use and
benefit, to the damage and prejudice of said
Fung Hing Kit In the aforesaid amount of 9.5
Million Pesos.

The RTC rendered judgment convicting the
accused of the crime charged. Was the conviction
proper?
A.

No. Article 315(1)(b) requires proof of receipt by the
offender of the money, goods, or other personal
property in trust or on commission, or for administration,
or under any other obligation involving the duty to
make delivery of or to return the same. In other words,
mere receipt of the money, goods, or personal property
does not satisfy the first element, it must be demonstrated
that the character of such receipt must either be in
trust, on commission or for administration or that the
accused has the obligation to deliver or return the
same money, goods or personal property received.

328

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

The Information itself is bereft of any indication

that accused received private complainant's money in
such manner as to create a fiduciary relationship
between them. On the contrary, the Information reads
that private complainant "invested" his money with
Gen-Portal. Hence the accused cannot be convicted
of the crime charged under such information. (Legaspi
v. People, 15 0ct 2018, Tijam, 4.).
Q.

An Information for Illegal sale ot dangerous drugs
was filed against the accused the accusatory
portion of which reads as follows:

That on or about 12:15 in the early dawn of
July 5, 2011 in Brgy. Malindong, Binmaley, Pangasinan
and within the jurisdiction of this Honorable
Court, the above-named accused, did, then and
there, willfully and unlawfully sell Methamphetamine
Hydrochloride or "shabu", a dangerous drug, without
any authority to sell the same.
Contrary to Section 5, Article II, of RA 9165.
Can the accused be convicted of the violation
of Soction 5, Article ll of R.A. No. 9165 under such
an Information?
,.

A.

No. The accused was supposedly charged with the
crime of illegal sale of dangerous drugs, defined and
penalized under Section 5, Article II Of RA 9165 - the
prosecution of which requires that the following elements
be proven; (1) the identity of the buyer and tile seller,
the object and the consideration; and (2) the delivery
of the thing sold and the payment therefor,

The

Information filed against the

accused,

however, makes a conclusion of law - that he "did x x
x sell" dangerous drugs - without specifically stating
1) the identity of the buyer; 2) the amount of
dangerous drugs supposedly traded by the accused;

329

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

and 3) the consideration for the sale. The prosecution
in this case deprived the accused of his right to be
informed of the offense charged against him. (People
• Reyes, 15 October 2018, Reyos, J.)
Q.

Petitioner was charged with estafa under Article

315(1)(b) of the Revised Penal Code. The information
charging the Petitioner reads as follows:
That on or about the 10th day of September

2000 in the City of Dumaguete, Philippines, and
within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the
said accused, having obtained and received from
one Cynthia Jaime various kinds of jewelry valued
in the total amount of PR705,685.00 for the purpose

of selling the samo on consignment basis with
express obligation to account for and remit the
entire proceeds of the sale if sold or to return the
same if unsold within an agreed period of time
and despite repeated demands therefor, did, then
and there willfully, unlawfully and feloniously fail
to remit proceeds of the sale of said Items or to
return any of the Items that may have been unsold
to said Cynthia Jaime but instead has willfully,
unlawfully and feloniously misappropriated, misapplied
and converted the same to his/her own use and
benefit to the damage and prejudice of said
Cynthia Jaime In the aforementioned amount
of 0705,685.00. [Emphasis supplied]
The Petitioner was convicted of the crime
charged. On appeal, the Petitioner pointed out that
the private complainant in the Information went by
the name "Cynthia Jaime," whereas, during trial,
the private complainant turned out to be "Rita
Jaimes." Further, Cynthia Jaime was never presented
as witness. Hence, citing People v. Uba, 106 Phil.

330

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

332, and United States v. Lahoy/ahoy, 38 Phil.
330, Petitioner would insist on her acquittal on the
postulate that her constitutional right to be
informed of the nature of the accusation against
her has been violated. Is the Petitioner's argument

correct?
A.

No. The variance between the allegations of the
information and the evidence offered by the
prosecution does not of itself entitle the accused to an

acquittal, more so if the variance relates to the
designation of the offended party, a mere formal
defect, which does not prejudice the substantial rights
of the accused.

Petitioner's reliance on Uba is misplaced.In Uba,
the appellant was charged with oral defamation, a
crime against honor, wherein the identity of the person
against whom the defamatory words were directed is
a material element. Thus, an erroneous designation of
the person injured is material. On the contrary, in the
instant case, Petitioner was charged with estafa, a
crime against property that does not absolutely require

as indispensable the proper designation of the name
of the offended party. Rather, what is absolutely
necessary is the correct identification of the criminal
act charged in the information. Thus, in case of an
error in the designation of the offended party in crimes
against property, S12 R110 mandates the correction
of the information, not its dismissal.
In offenses against property, if the subject matter
of the offense is generic and not identifiable, such as
the money unlawfully taken as in Lahoyahoy, an error
in the designation of the offended party is fatal and
would result in the acquittal of the accused. However,
if the subject matter of the offense is specific and
identifiable, such as a warrant or a check, an error in
the designation of the offended party is immaterial.
331

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here, the subject matter of the offense does not
refer to money or any other generic property. Instead,
the information specified the subject of the offense as
"various kinds of jewelry valued in the total amount
of 705,685.00." The charge was thereafter sufficiently
fleshed out and proved by the Trust Receipt Agreement
signed by Petitioner and presented during trial, which
enumerates these "various kinds of jewelry valued in
the total amount of PhP 705,685. Hence the error in
the designation of the offended party did not violate
the Petitioner's right to be informed of the nature and
the cause of the accusation against her. (Senador v.
People, 6 March 2013, Velasco, J.).
Q.

Can a complaint or Information charge more than
one offense?

A

No, a complaint or information must charge only one
offense. (S13 R110). A duplicitous or multiplicitous
complaint or information may be quashed upon
motion. (S3[1] R117)

0.

What is the rationale for the rule prohibiting duplicitous
or multiplicitous complaints or informations?

A.

The rationale for the rule is to give the defendant the
necessary knowledge of the charge to enable him to
prepare his defense. The State should not heap upon
the defendant two or more charges which might
confuse him in his defense. (People v, Manalili, 294
SCRA 220)

•

What Is the exception to the rule that a complaint
or information must charge only one offense?

A.

The exception is when the law prescribes a single
punishment for various offenses (S13 R110). Such
offenses constitute a complex crime which must be
alleged in the complaint or information.

332

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

A complex crime is one in which a single act
constitutes two or more grave or less grave felonies,
or when an offense is a necessary means for
committing the other. (Art. 48, Revised Penal Code)
Q.

What is an
information?

amendment

of

a

A.

An amendment of a complaint or information is the
adding or striking out or the correction of an allegation
or the name of any party. (ASCAN)

Q.

What are the two kinds of amendments?

A.

An amendment may either be formal or substantial.

complaint

or

The test as to whether an amendment is only of
form is whether or not a defense under the complaint
or information as it originally stood would be equally
available after the amendment is made, and whether
or not any evidence which the accused might have
had would be equally applicable to the amended
complaint or information. If the answer is yes, the
amendment is formal, if the answer is no, the
amendment is substantial. (People v. Degamo, 402 SCRA
133; Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA 134 [1992])
Q.

What Is the rule regarding amendment of a
complaint or information?

A.

Before plea
A complaint or information may be amended, in
form or in substance, without leave of court, al any
time before the accused enters his plea.
However any amendment before plea, which
downgrades the nature of the offense charged in or
excludes any accused from the complaint or information,
can be made only upon motion by the prosecutor,
with notice to the offended party and with leave of

333

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

court. The court shall state ts reasons in resolving
the motion and copies of its order shall be furnished
all parties, especially the offended party. (S14 R110)
After plea

After the plea and during the trial, a formal
amendment may only be made with leave of court
and when it can be done without causing prejudice to
the rights of the accused. (S14 R110). Substantial
amendments can never be made after the accused
has pleaded.
Q.

An information for homicide was filed in the
RTC against Danilo Buhat, "John Doe" and
"Richard Doe", The information alleged that on
16 October 1992, Danilo Buhat, armed with a
knife, unlawfully attacked and killed one Ramon
George Yu while the said two unknown assailants
held his arms, "using superior strength, inflicting
mortal wounds which were the direct cause of his
death." Buhat was arraigned and pleaded not
guilty. Subsequently the prosecution moved to
amend the information by changing the designation
of the crime from homicide to murder and by
adding the allegation that petitioner had conspired
with his co-accused in the killing. Buhat opposed
the motion to amend stating that the proposed
amendments are substantial and hence cannot be
allowed after plea.
a) Are the amendments sought to
substantial?

be made

b) Would your answer be the same if there was
no allegation of abuse of superior strength in
the information?

334

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

A.

a) No. An amendment after plea resulting in the
inclusion of an allegation of conspiracy and in the
indictment of some other persons in addition to the
original accused, constitutes a mere formal amendment

permissible even after arraignment. Buhat undoubtedly is
charged as a principal in the killing of Ramon George
Yu whom Buhat is alleged to have stabbed while two
unknown persons held the victim's arms. The addition
of the phrase, "conspiring, confederating and helping
one another" does not change the nature of petitioner's
participation as principal in the killing.

Nor would the amendment of the designation of
the crime from homicide to murder be substantial,
"Abuse of superior strength" having already been
alleged in the original information charging homicide,
the amendment of the name of the crime to murder
constitutes a mere formal amendment permissible
even after arraignment. (Buhat v. Court of Appeals
GR. No, 119601, 17 December 1996).
b)

No my answer would not be the same. In such a
case lhe amendment changing the offense charged
from homicide to murder would be substantial.
The reason is that the amendment would not be a
simple correction but a change in the nature of
the offense charged. (Dionaldo v. Dacuycuy, 108

SCRA 736)
Q.

Samonte shot and killed Angelito. An information
for murder was tiled with the RTC against
Samonte. Samonte pleaded not guilty and invoked
self-defense. Later upon evidence that Corpus
had instructed Samonte to kill Angelito, the
prosecution filed a motion for leave to admit
amended information charging Corpus and Samonte
as having acted in conspiracy in the murder
of Angellto.

335

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
a) Was the amendment including Corpus as accused
and adding the allegation of conspiracy between
him and Samonte a substantial or formal
amendment?

b) Should the court grant the motion?

A.

a) The amendment is merely a formal one. An
amendment which does not change the nature or the
essence of the offense charged is merely formal

The facts alleged in the accusatory part of the
amended information are similar to that of the original

information except as to the inclusion of Corpus as
Samonte's co-accused and the insertion of the phrase
"conspiring and confederating together." The allegation

of conspiracy does not alter the basic theory of the
prosecution that Samonte willfully and intentionally
shot Angelita. Hence, the amendment is merely formal.
b)

No. Under S14 R110, after the plea and during the
trial, a formal amendment may be made only with
eave of court and when it can be done without
prejudicing the rights of the accused.

Upon arraignment under the original information,
Samonte had admitted the killing but pleaded selfdefense. While conspiracy is merely a formal amendment,
Samonte will be prejudiced if the amendment will be
allowed after his plea. His defense and corresponding
evidence will not be compatible with the allegation of
conspiracy in the new information. Hence such formal
amendment after plea is not allowed. (Corpus v.
Pamular, 5 September 2018, Leonen, 4.).°

is submitted that the arnendment was substantial since the evidence
and defense available under the original information would no longer be available
under the emended information

336

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

Prosecution of X for frustrated murder. After the
prosecution had rested Its case, the victim died.
The prosecution filed a motion to amend the
Information from frustrated murder to murder. X
objected on the ground that the amendment was a
substantial one which cannot be allowed after plea.
a) Is the objection of X meritorious?
b) Assuming that the court allowed the amendment
of the information, is K entitled to a
preliminary investigation on the new or amended
information?

A
a) No the objection of X is unmeritorious. The
amendment is only a formal one since there is an
identity of offenses charged in the original and
amendment information and the change related
only to the state of execution; that is from
frustrated to consummated
b)

Q.

No. The Supreme Court held that since only a
formal amendment was involved in the second
information, a preliminary investigation is unnecessary
and cannot be demanded by the accused.
(Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA 134 [1992], e.b.)

Prosecutor Artin filed an Information for violation
of R.A. 8353 (Anti-Rape Law) in relation with R.A.
7610 (Special Protection of Children Against Abuse,
Exploitation and Discrimination Act) with the
Regional Trial Court against Boysie. Prosecutor
Artin failed to allege in the Information that the
victim is the niece of the accused, although the
victim stated their relationship in her Sinumpaang
Salaysay. Before the scheduled arraignment,
Prosecutor Artin formally moved for the amendment
337

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

of

the

Information

to

include

the

alleged

relationship. Boysle opposed the motion arguing
that the addition of the allegation of relationship
will raise the category of the offense charged in
the original Information; thus, he is entitled to a
reinvestigation before amendment may be allowed.
If you were the prosecutor, how will you reply to
Boysle's opposition? (2013 Sample Bar Question).

A.

If I were the prosecutor, I would reply to Boysie's
opposition by arguing that the amendment of the
information was merely formal.
The Supreme Court has held that a preliminary
investigaticn on the amended information is unnecessary
if the amendment is meroly formal. (Teehankee v
Madayag, 207 SCRA 134).

Here the amendment is merely formal for it did
not change the designation or nature of the crime but
merely added an averment regarding relationship.
Hence Boysie is not entitled to a preliminary investigation
on the amended information.
Q.

In information charging the vlolation of Sec. 3(e)
of R.A. No. 3019, is the change of amount from
P7,843,54.33 (sic) to P7,842,941.60 only a formal
amendment?

A.

Yes. The amendment of the Information adds nothing
essential for the accused's conviction of the crime
charged nor does it seek to amend the Information's
recital of facts constituting the offense charged. On
the contrary, the amendment simply sought to correct
the total amount of the disbursement vouchers reflected
in the Information to make it conform to the evidence
on record. Moreover, a plain reading of the amount

338

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

stated, ie., P7,843,54.33 cannot shows that the same
is erroneous and mathematically inexistent, and

therefore, cannot be proved. (People v. Sandiganbayan,
24 July 2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)
Q.

The original information charged the accused with
failure to file his income tax return thus:

That on or about the 15th day of April, 2002,
at Quezon City, and within the jurisdiction of [the
CTA] the above named accused, a duly registered

taxpayer, and sole proprietor of "Weigh Less Center"
with principal office at No. 31 Roces Avenue,
Quezon City, and with several branches in
Quezon City, Makati, San Fernando and Dagupan
City, did then and there, wilfully, unlawfully and
feloniously fail to file his Income Tax Return (ITR)
with the Bureau of Internal Revenue for the
taxable year 2001, to the damage and prejudice of
the Government in the estimated amount of
P1,089,439.08, exclusive of penalties, surcharges
and 1nterest.
The accused pleaded not guilty. Subsequently
the prosecution filed a motion for leave to admit
an amended information which reads thus:
That on or about the 15th day of April, 2002,
at Quezon City, and within the jurisdiction of [the
CTA] the above named accused, doing business
under the name and style of "Weigh Less Center"/
Mendez Medlcal Group", with several branches In
Quezon City, Muntinlpa City, Mandaluvong City
and Makati City, did then and there, wilfully,
unlawfully and feloniously fail to file his Income
tax return ([TR) with the Bureau of Internal Revenue

339

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

for income earned for the taxable year 2001, to the
damage and prejudice of the Government in the
estimated amount of P1,089,439.08, exclusive of
penalties, surcharges and interest.
The accused opposed the motion on the
grounds that the amendments sought (underscored)
were substantial, Should the prosecution's motion
to amend the information be granted?
A.

Yes. The amendments sought are merely formal and
thus may be allowed.
Amendments that do not charge another offense
different from that charged in the original one; or do
not alter the prosecution's theory of the case so as to
cause surprise to the accused and affect the form of
defense he has or will assume are considered merely
as formal amendments.
Here, the amendments sought by the prosecution
pertains to (/) the addition of the phrase "doing
business under the name and style of Mendez Medical
Group;" (ii) the change and/or addition of the branches
of petitioner's operation; and (ii) the addition of the
phrase "for income earned." We cannot see how these
amendments would adversely affect any substantial
right of the petitioner as accused.
Since the accused operates as a sole proprietor
from taxable years 2001 t0 2003, the accused should
have filed a consolidated return in his principal place
of business, regardless of the number and location of
his other branches. Consequently, we cannot but
agree with the CTA that the change and/or addition of
the branches of the accused's operation in the
information does not constitute substantial amendment
because it does not change the prosecution's theory
that the accused failed to file hls Income tax return.

340

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

The accused

argues that his rights were

prejudiced by an amendment when a defense under
the original information would no longer be available

after the amendment is made, and when any evidence
the accused might have, would be inapplicable to the
Information as amended.
At first, a change in the location of branches
alleged in the information may appear to deprive the
accused of his defense in the original information, ie.,

the accused's branches in Dagupan and San Fernando
were registered only in 2003 and were therefore
inexistent" in 2001. However, this is not the kind of
defense contemplated under the Rules of Criminal
Procedure, and broadly under the due process of law.

To be sure, the jurisprudential test on whether a
defendant is prejudiced by the amendment of an
information pertains to the availability of the same
defense and evidence that tne accused previously
had under the original information. This test, however,
must be read together with the characteristic thread of
formal amendments, which is to maintain the nature
of the crime or the essence of the offense charged. In
the present case, this thread remained consistently

under the amended information, alleging the accused's
failure to file his return and consequently to pay the
correct amount of taxes. Accordingly, the accused
could not have been surprised at all.
In the amended information, the prosecution
additionally alleged that accused is doing business
under the name and style of 'Weigh Less Center'l
Mendez Medical Group." Given the nature of a sole
proprietorship, the addition of the phrase "doing
business under the name and style" is merely
descriptive of the nature of the business organization
established by the accused as a way to carry out the
341

."

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

practice of his profession. As a phrase descriptive of a
sole proprietorship, the accused cannot feign ignorance
of the "entity" "Mendez Medical Group" because this
entity is nothing more than the shadow of its business

owner - accused himself
We agree with the prosecution that accused has
no reason to complain for the inclusion of the phrase

"Mendez Medical Group." In the Reply-Affidavit it
submitted during the preliminary investigation, the
prosecution has attached copies of accused's paid
advertisements making express reference to "Mendez
Medical Group." (Mendez v. Poople, 11 June 2014,
Brion, J.).
Q.

Define substitution of the complaint or information.

A.

Substitution of the complaint or information is the
dismissal by the court of the original complaint or
information upon the filing of a new one charging the
proper offense, provided the accused would not be
placed in double jeopardy. (S14 R110)

Q.

When may substitution be effected?

A

Substitution shall be effected if it appears at any time
before judgment that a mistake has been made in
charging the proper offense and the accused cannot
be convicted of the offense charged or any other
offense necessarily included therein, (S14 R110, S19
R119)

Q.

Accused was charged in an information with rape
through sexual intercourse committed against a
15-year-old minor. The information alleged that
the accused with lewd design had sexual
intercourse with the 15-year-old minor through
force and intimidation contrary to Article 266-A, in
relation to Article 266-B, of the Revised Penal Code.
342

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

During the trial, the victim testified that the
accused Inserted his finger Into her vagina. The
RTC convicted the accused of rape by sexual
assault since instead of a penile penetration there

was a digital penetration of the victim's private
part. On appeal, the Court of Appeals ordered the
remand of the case to the RTC. The CA held that
although the accused was clearly guilty of rape by
sexual assault, what the trial court should have
done was to direct the state prosecutor to file a
new information charging the proper offense, and

after compliance therewith, to dlsmiss the original
information in accordance with the last paragraph
of S14 R110 and S19 R119.

a) Was the CA's order to remand the case correct?
b)

May the CA convict the accused instead of
rape by sexual assault based on the variance
doctrine?

a)

No. The last paragraph of S14 R110 and S19
R119 are applicable only before judgment has
been renoered. When the judgment was reviewed

A.

by the CA, lhe RTC had already rendered a
judgment of conviction.
b)

No. The variance doctrine allows the conviction of
an accused for a crime proved which is different
from but necessarily included in the crime charged.
Rape by sexual assault is not necessarily
included or subsumed in rape through sexual
intercourse. The accused may however be convicted
of lascivious conduct against a child under Sec
5(b) of R.A. No. 7610, which offense is necessarily
included in the offense charged. (People v. Caoili,

8 August 2017, e.b., Tijam, J.).

343

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In substitution, shall the accused be discharged
from custody?

A.

No. The accused shall not be discharged if there
appears good cause to detain him. In such a case,
the court shall commit the accused to answer for the
proper offense and dismiss the original case upon the
filing of the proper information. ($19 R119). The court

may require the witnesses to give ball for their
appearance at the trial. (S14 R110)
Q.

A.

Accused were charge with murder before the
RTC. What would be the remedy of the accused
if during trial, they were able to show that the
alleged murders were committed In furtherance of
rebellion, and thus absorbed In the crime of
rebellion under the political offense doctrine?
File a motion for substitution under S14 R110. Thus, if

it is shown that the proper charge against the accused
should have been simple rebellion, the trial court shall
dismiss the murder charges upon the filing of the
information for simple rebellion, as long as accused
would not be placed in double jeopardy. (Ocampo v.
Abando, 11 February 2014, e.b., Sereno, C.J.).

0.

Distinguish amendment of
substitution of Information.

A.

Both amendment and substitution of the information
may be made before or after the defendant pleads,
but they may be distinguished as follows:

L

AMENDMENT SUBSTITUTION

information

from

Does not involve the

Involves the

dismissal of the case.
May involve either formal or

dismissal of the case.
Necessarily involves a

substantial changes,

substantial change from the
344

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

although after plea,
only formal amendments

original charge.

are
allowed.
Amendment before plea or a
Must be made
formal amendment can be
with leave of court.
made without leave of court. ]
Where the amendment is
only formal, there is no need

Another preliminary
investigation is required.

for another preliminary

investigation.
j
As a rule, the accused need
The accused must plead
not plea anew to the
anew since there will be a
amended charge since only
a formal amendment

new charge.

is involved_
Evidence taken before the
amendment need
not be retaken.

Evidence in the original case
which is relevant to the new
case has to be retaken. This
is the reason why the court
may require witnesses to post
bail to guarantee their
appearance in the new case.

An amended information
refers to the same offense

Requires or presupposes that
the new information involves
e different offense which does
not include or is not
necessarily included in the
original charge; hence the
accused cannot invoke
double jeopardy upon the
dismissal of the original
information,

charged in the original
information or to an offense

which necessarily includes or
is necessarily included in the
original charge; hence

l

Substantial amendments to
the information cannot be
made over the accused's
objection, for If the original
Information would be
withdrawn, the
accused could invoke
double jeopardy

345

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(See Teehankee v. Madayag, 207 SCRA 134, 140;
S14 R110; $19 R119)
Q.

Informations for homicide were filed against
Mayor Galvez before Judge Villajuan of Branch 14
of the RTC of Malolos, Bulacan. Before arraignment,
the prosecution filed a motion to withdraw the
informations which were granted by Judge
VIlajuan. Subsequently the prosecution filed
informations for murders arising out of the same
acts before Branch 10 of the RTC of Malolos,
Bulacan. The accused contends that the withdrawal
of the Informations for homicide and the filing of
the informations for murder were improper. The
accused contends that the prosecution should
have moved to amend the information in Branch
14 since the charge for murder necessarily
includes the charge for homicide therein. ls the
accused's contention correct?

A.

No. The prosecuting attorney is given the broad
power, sole authority and discretion to enter a nolle
prosequl provided he does not act arbitrarily and acts
subject to the discretion of the court. It is quite plausible
under S14 R110 that, instead of an amendment, an
information for homicide may also be dismissed
before the accused pleads, to give way to the filing of
a new information for murder. Although the offenses
charged under the three new informations necessarily
include those charged under the original informations,
the substitution of informations was not a fatal error. A
contrary ruling would sacrifice substantial justice for
formal nuances on the altar of procedural technicalities.
(Galvez v. Court of Appeals, 24 October 1994,
Regalado, 4.).

+

may also be argued that s.noe the amendment from homicide to
murder would not place the accused in double jeopardy (there having been no
plea yet), the rule that in substitution, the new information involves a new ctfense

346

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

In the trial of a homicide case, the fiscal was able
to prove treachery and evident premeditation
without objection on the part of the defense. By
reason thereof, the fiscal moved to amend the
information invoking the provisions of the Rules
of Court which allows amendment of the pleadings
to conform to the evidence. He then filed an
amended information changing the homicide to
that of murder which, however, was vehemently
objected to by the defense.
(A)

Resolve the merits of the fiscal's motion to
amend.

(B) Suppose instead of allowing the amendment
prayed for, the judge dismissed the case and
ordered the filing of a new information for
murder, is the order legally assailable? Reasons.
(85 Bar Q9).

A.
(A) The fiscal's motion lo amend the information
should be denied. The provisions of S5 R10 do
not apply to criminal cases which are specifically
governed by S14 R110 under which a substantial

amendment can no longer be made after the
accused had pleaded.
Here the amendment is substantial as it seeks to
change the nature of the offense charged and the
accused had already pleaded since the case had
already reached the trial stage. Hence the motion
should be denied.

not necessarily included in or necessariy including tne offense in the original

information is not applicable

347

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

(B) Yes the order is legally assailable. Under S14
R110, the dismissal of the original information
upon the filing of a new one charging the proper
offense is subject to the proviso that the accused
would not be placed in double jeopardy.
Here the filing of a new information for murder
would place the accused in double jeopardy since
murder necessarily includes homicide.

0.

The accused pleaded not guilty to the charge of
less serious physical injuries. Before judgment,
the fiscal moved that he be allowed to file a new
information against the accused for the graver
crime of frustrated murder it appearing that the
injuries were inflicted with intent to kill, The defense

objected upon the ground that the charge for less
serious physical injuries is included in the offense
of frustrated murder and since he had already
pleaded to the lesser charge, the filing of a new
information would constitute second jeopardy. The
prosecution replied that there would be no double
jeopardy as the complaint will be dismissed upon
the filing of the Information for frustrated murder,
pursuant to S11 R119 of the 1985 Rules on Criminal
Procedure relevant to situations when mistake
has been made in charging the proper offense, The
fiscal argued that the fact of the accused's intent
to kill was discovered by the prosecution and the
complainant only during the trial of the case.
a) Resolve the motion. Reasons.

b)

Suppose the intent to kill is Indicated in the
affidavits of the witnesses for the complainant
which were the basis for the filing of the
complaint, would your resolution be different
and if so, why? (87 Bar 011).
Now $19R119

348

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

A.

a) The fiscal's motion for substitution of information
should be granted.
Under S14 R110 on substitution, if it appears at

any time before judgment that a mistake has been
made in charging the proper offense, the court shall
dismiss the original information upon the filing of a
new one charging the proper offense, provided the
accused would not be placed in double jeopardy.
Here there was a mistake in charging the proper
offense, which should have been frustrated murder
instead of less serious physical injuries, and the filing
of the new information would not place the accused in
double jeopardy since the graver offense arose from
facts discovered after the accused had pleaded in the

first case."
b)

No, my resolution would be different. In that case
the motion for substitution should not be granted
since the filing of the new information would place
the accused in double jeopardy.

The reason is that the intent to kill was known all
along to the prosecution even before the accused
pleaded to the information for less serious physical
injuries. Hence it would not fall within any of the
exceptions under S7 R117, particularly S7(b)

A,though $11 R1t9 (now $19 R119) apparently requires that n
substitution the accused cannot be convicted
the offense charged or any other
offense necessarily included therein, this provision should be read in conjunction
with $14 R110 which provides tnat substitution should not place the accused in
double jeopardy. Hence an assiduous reading of the two provisions would lead
to the conclusion that substitution is proper even f the accused can be convicted
of the offense charged in the oniginal information or a necessarily included
offense, provided that the accused would not be placed in double jeopardy under

o

the new information

349

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Upon arraignment, A pleaded not guilty to the
charge of serious physical injuries. Ten days
later, the victim died. Hence, the Fiscal moved for
the amendment of the information so as to charge
the accused with the crime of homicide, The
accused objected on the ground that he had been
put in jeopardy of being convicted of the crime of
serious physical injuries; and that another prosecution
for homicide for the same act under an amended
Information would constitute double jeopardy.
The accused also argued that the amendment Is a
substantial one which cannot be made after plea.
If you were the judge, how would you resolve the
motion? Explain. (84 Bar Q13ed).

A.

Ifl were the judge, I would grant the motion to amend
the information from serious physical injuries to
homicide.
The accused's argument that he would be put in
double jeopardy is without merit since the graver
charge of homicide resulted from a supervening fact,
that is, the death of the victim after arraignment.
(S7la] R117)

Amendment is proper since the same is merely
formal not substantial. A substantial amendment is
one which will adversely affect a substantial right of
the accused. The accused does not have a vested
right against prosecution for a graver offense arising
from a supervening pursuant to S7(a) R117, The reason
is that there would be no double jeopardy in such a
situation. Hence no substantial right of the accused
would be adversely affected if he is prosecuted for
such graver offense.

350

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

Q.

What is the venue of a criminal action?

A.

General rule

In the court of the municipality or territory where
the offense was committed or where any of its
essential ingredients occurred.
Offense committed in a vehicle, aircraft, or train (VAT)
In the course of its trip

In the court of any municipality or territory where

said train, aircraft, or vehicle passed during its trip,
including the place of departure and arrival, (PDA)
Offense committed on board a vessel in the course of
ns voyage

In the court of the first port of entry or of any
municipality or territory where the vessel passed during
such voyage, (PF)

Crime committed outside of Phil but punishable under
Art. 2of RPC
Court where the criminal action is first filed. (S15
R110).
Q.

A.

What is the venue of criminal actions involving
cybercrimo offenses?
The criminal actions for violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime

offenses) and/or Section 5 (Other offenses), Chapter
ll of RA 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention Act), shall be

filed before the designated cybercrime court of the
province or city where the offense or any of its
elements is committed, or where any part of the
computer system used is situated, or where any of the

351

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

damage caused to a natural or juridical person took
place; Provided, that the court where the criminal
action is first filed shall acquire jurisdiction to the
exclusion of the other courts.
All other crimes defined and penalized by the
Revised Penal Code, as amended, and other special
laws, committed by, through, and with the use of
information and communication technology, as provided
under Section 6, Chapter ll of RA 10175, shall be filed

before the regular or other specialized regional trial
courts, as the case may be. (Rule on Cybercrime
Warrants)
Q.

If a criminal case is filed in the wrong venue,
what is the remedy of the accused?

A

The accused can file a motion to quash on the ground
that the court has no jurisdiction over the offense
charged. Venue in criminal cases is jurisdictional,
being an essential element of the offense charged.
(Cudia v. Court of Appeals, 284 SCRA 173 (1998])
Hence this ground may be raised at any time, even
during appeal.

Q.

A bus departed the terminal from Manlla bound
for Baguio City. In Malolos during a stop-over, X
and Y boarded the bus. While the bus was on the
road in Urdaneta, Pangasinan, X and Y announced
a hold-up. Thoy divested the passengers of their
valuables and got off in Sison, Pangasinan.
a)

Where is the venue of the criminal case for
robbery?

b) What if X and Y committed the robbery in Malolos,
while the bus was on a stop-over. Where is
the venue of the criminal case for robbery?

352

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

A.
a) In the court of the municipality or territory where
the bus passed during the trip, including the place
of departure and arrival. Hence the case may be

filed in Manila, Malolos, Urdaneta, Sison, and
Baguio City.
b)

Malolos. If the offense was not committed in the

course of the vehicle's trip but while it was
stationary in an intermediate stop or station, or at
either of its terminal stations, the rule in S15(a)
R110 applies. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 282 [9" rev

ed., 2001)).
Q.

A passenger ship departed the port of Manila
bound for the port of lloilo City. While the ship
was in the course of its voyage off the coast of
Batangas City, X killed Y during a bar fight.
a)

b)

May the criminal case for homicide be filed
in Manila?

May the criminal case for homicide be filed in

loilo City, upon arrival thereat?
A.
a) No. Unlike S15(b), the place or port of departure
is not included as an alternative venue. (2
FLORENZ D. REGALADO. REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 219 [6 rev. ed. 19891.

b)

Yes. S15() states that when the offense is on board
a vessel in the course of its voyage, the case may
be filed in the court of the first port of entry.

y

s submitted that the case may be filed in Manila Atter al, #t cannot be
gainsaid that the ship will necessarily pass through the municipal waters of
Manila after having departed from its port. There seems to be no cogent reason
ta distinguish in this regard between 15(b) and 16(c)

353

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In behalf of the Yuchengco family, the private
respondent fifed a criminal complaint against the
petitioners before the office of the city prosecutor
of Makati. The private respondent in his complaint
averred that the petitioners had put up a website
and a blogsite were they posted articles and
statements that libeled Ambassador Yuchengco.
The informations for libel were subsequently filed
with the RTC of Makati City and averred that the
defamatory article was first published and accessed
In Makatl. Does the Makatl RTC have jurisdiction

over the case?
A.

No. If the complainant is a private individual, venue in
libel cases is where he actually resides at the time of
the commission of the offense or where the
defamatory article was printed and first published. In
criminal prosecution for libel where defamatory article
was posted on a website and blogsite, an allegation
that the defamatory article was first published and
accessed in Makati is not sufficient to vest jurisdiction
upon the Makati RTC. There is no way of determining
the situs of the article's first printing and publication.
The place where the article was first accessed cannot
be equated to the first publication. (Bonifacio v, RTC
of Makati, 5 May 2010, Carpio Morales, J.)

0.

An information for libel was filed with the RTC of Manila
against the accused publisher and editors of Malaya
newspaper. The information alleged as follows:

That on April 21, 1999, in Manila City, and
within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court,
above-named accused, as publisher/writer, executive
editor and editor, respectively of Malaya with address
at Port Area, Manila City defamed private complainant
Narciso Y, Santiago, Jr,, did then and there,
knowingly, willfully, unlawfully and feloniously by
writing and publishing an article in the Malaya x xx.
354

RULE 110

Prosecution of Offenses

On certiorari, the CA ordered the dismissal of
the case stating that the information did not allege
that the libelous article was printed and first
published in Manila and thus venue could not be
laid in Manila. Was the dismissal correct?

A.,

No. The information sufficiently alleged that the article

was first published in Manila. Paraphrasing the
Information, the accused, as publisher/writer, executive
editor and editor defamed Santiago on 21 April 1999,
in Manila City, by writing and publishing an article in

the Malaya with address at Port Area, Manila. It is
clear that Port Area, Manila is where the defamatory
article was written and published because that is
the address of Malaya, an unquestionably printed
newspaper, wherein the article appeared, That the
Information did not expressly state "first published" is
of no moment because the word "published" does not
exclude the first publication. (People v. Macasaet, 5
March 2018, Caguioa, J.)
Q.

The accused was charged with perjury through
the making of a false affidavit under Article 183 of
the Revised Penal Code, committed allegedly by
executing a certification against forum shopping
containing a false narration. Where is the proper
venue of the perjury charge? Makati City, where
the certificate against forum shopping was notarized,
or Pasay City, where the CFS was presented to
the trial court?

A.

Makati where the affiant subscribed and swore to her
CFS bofore the notary public. Perjury committed
through the making of a false affidavit under Art. 183
is committed when the affiant subscribes and swears
to his or her affidavit since it is when the crime is
consummated and all the elements of perjury are
executed. (Union Bank v. People, 28 February 2012,
e.b., Brion, J).

355

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

The information for falsification of private document

filed with the MCTC of Jagna, Bohol, alleged that
the crime was committed in Jagna. If the evidence
adduced during the trial would show that the
crime was committed outside the MCTC's territorial
jurisdiction (i.e., Cebu City), should the MCTC dismiss
the case on the ground of lack of jurisdiction?

A.

Yes, since the defense of lack of jurisdiction due to
improper venue may be raised at any stage of the
case. (Vavaja v. De Castro, 22 June 2015, Peralta, J.)

Q.

In payment of construction materials delivered to
her, the Accused issued to the Complainant at the
Accused's office in Pampanga two postdated
checks drawn against Metrobank, Pampanga. The
Complainant deposited the checks in her bank
account at Equitable PCIBank In Makati City, but
the checks were subsequently dishonored by the
drawee bank. The informations for the violation of
B.P. Blg. 22 were filed before the MT of Makati
City. The MTC rendered judgment convicting the
Accused. On appeal, the Accused argued that the
judgment of conviction was null and void since
the venue was improperly placed, The Accused
contended that the checks were issued and
dishonored in Pampanga and that the deposit of
the checks is not an essential element of the
violation of B.P. Blg. 22. Was venue properly laid
in Makati City, the place where the checks were
deposited?

A

Yes. Venue of B.P. Blg. 22 cases may be laid in the
place where the check was deposited. The reason is
that violations of BP 22 cases are categorized as
transitory or continuing crimes, meaning that some
acts material and essential thereto and requisite in
their consummation occur in one municipality or territory,
while some occur in another.

356

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

There is no denying, therefore, that the court of
the place where the check was deposited can be
vested with jurisdiction to try cases involving violations
of BP 22. Thus, the fact that the check subject of the
instant case was drawn, issued, and delivered in
Pampanga does not strip off the Makati MeTC of its
jurisdiction over the instant case for It is undisputed
that the subject check was deposited at the Makati

Branch of Equitable PCIBank. The MeTC of Makatl,
therefore, correctly took cognizance of the Instant
case and rendered its decision in the proper exercise

of its jurisdiction. (Morillo v. People, 9 December
2015, Peralta, 1).°
Q.

AAA and BBB were married in 2006. BBB started
working in Singapore as a chef in 2007 and he
acquired permanent residency status there. In
Singapore, he also began an affair with a Singaporean
woman with whom he was cohabiting. He was
charged in an information before the RTC of Pasig
City, where AAA resides, with the violation of
Section 5(l) of RA 9262, that is, the crime of
causing mental and emotional anguish to his wife.
May Philippine courts exercise jurisdiction over
an offense constituting psychological violence
under Republic Act No. 9262, otherwise known as
the Anti-Violence Against Women and their
Children Act of 2004, committed through marital
infidelity, when the alleged illicit relationship
occurred or is occurring outside the country?

re cling deserves serious re-examination The vi@ration of BP. Blg
22 cannot be considered as continuing since the offense was aready
Consummated by the dishonor of the chock. After the aishonor, it cannot be said
that the accused is still continuing to commit the offense of the violation of B.P
Blg, 22. As to the place where the check was deposited, the deposit of the check
is not an essential element of the offense. It is the dis'onor of tte check which
is, and the situs thereof lies in the place where the drawee bank is situated

357

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A,

Yes.

Section

7

Of RA

No.

9262 on venue

undoubtedly pertains to jurisdiction. As correctly
pointed out by AAA, Section 7 provides that the case
may be filed where the crime or any of its elements
was committed at the option of the complainant. While
the psychological violence as the means employed by
the perpetrator is certainly an indispensable element
of Iha offense, equally essential also is the element of
mental or emotional anguish which is personal to the
complainant. What R.A. No. 9262 criminalizes is not
the marital infidelity per se but the psychological
violence causing mental or emotioral suffering on the
wife. Thus, the mental or emotional suffering of the
victim is an essential and distinct element in the
commission of the offense. (AAA v. BBB, 11 January
2018, Tijam, J.)
Q.

Fitcoin, Inc., through its President AB, with office
in the United Kingdom, is offering bit coins or
cyber currency through the internet to British expats
in the Philippines. AB resides in Birminghan, U.K.
The brochure of Fitcoin promises that the bit
coins will increase in value in a short time. Mr. C,
who is residing in the Philippines, bought bit
coins from Fitcoln, Inc. The bit coins Instead of
increasing in value depreciated by more than half,
May Mr. C file a complaint in the Philippines
against Fitcoin and AB for selling unregistered
securities in the Philippines?

A.

Yes. Under Section 21 of the Cybercrime Prevention
Act (CPA), jurisdiction shall lie with the RRTC if any of
the elements of the violation of the CPA was committed

within the Philippines or committed with the use of
any computer system wholly or partly situated in the
country, or when by such commission any damage is

358

RULE 110
Prosecution of Offenses

caused to a natural or juridical person, who at the
time of the commission, was in the Philippines.
Section 6 of the CPA provides that all crimes defined
by the Revised Penal Code or by special laws, if
committed by, through, and with the use of information
and communications technologies shall be covered by
the relevant provisions of the CPA.
Here Fi±coin's act of offering the bitcoins, which
are securities, violated Section 8.1, in relation to
Section 73, of the Securities Regulation Code, and
was committed by the use of the intemet, an information
and communications technology and it caused
damage to Mr. C who at the time of the commission of
the offense was in the Philippines. Hence the RTC
had jurisdiction.

359

RULE 111. PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION
0.

State the rule on institution of the civil action with
the criminal action.

A.

When a criminal action is instituted, the civil action for
the recovery of civil liability arising from the offense
charged" shall be deemed instituted with the criminal

action unless the offended party waives the civil
action, reserves the right to institute it separately, or
institutes it prior to the criminal action. (S1[a] R111)

The criminal action for violation of Batas
Pambansa Blg. 22 shall be deemed to include the
corresponding civil action. No reservation to file such
civil action separately shall be allowed. (S1[b]R111)

Special Rule for cases falling under the jurisdiction of
the Sandiganbayan or RTC/MTG pursuant to Section 4 of
P.D. NO. 1606.
The criminal action and the corresponding civil
action for the recovery of civil liability shall at all times
be simultaneously instituted with, and jointly determined
in, the same proceeding by the Sandiganbayan or the
appropriate courts, the filing of the criminal action
being deemed to necessarily carry with it the filing of
the civil action, and no right to reserve the filing of
such civil action separately from the criminal action
shall be recognized.

ciet liability arising from the offense charge is also teferred to as civil
lab«ity ex delicto

360

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

Q

Up to when may the offended party reserve the
right to institute separately the civil action?

A.

The reservation of the right to institute separately the
civil action shall be made before the prosecution starts
resenting_ its evidence and under circumstances
affording the offended party a reasonable opportunity
to make such reservation. (S1[a] R110).

When the accused unexpectedly pleaded guilty
to the offense charged during the arraignment, the
offended party should still be afforded a reasonable
time therefrom to make the reservation. (See PReyes
v. Sempio-Diy, G.R. No. 71914, 29 January 1986).

O.

Does the extinction of the penal action carry with
it the extinction of the civil action?

A.

No. However, the civil action based on delict may be
deemed extinguished if there is a finding in the final
judgment in the criminal action that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may anise did not
exist. (S2 R111).

Q.

Maxima was engaged in the sale of jewelry and
sustained business relations with Roman and
Magdalena who, especially Magdalena, used to
receive pieces of jewelry from Maxima for sale on
commission. It was understood that Magdalena
may in turn entrust the jewels to a third party to
sell. Magdalena through Roman received from
Maxima for sale, several pieces of jewelry, among
them the jewelry in question valued at P150,000.
Said jewelry was later entrusted by Magdalena to
Eugenia for sale. Eugenia absconded with said
jewelry and failed to account for it to Magdalena.

361

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

Maxima demanded of Magdalena and Roman
the return of the jewelry or its value but the latter
were unable to comply with the demands. Thereafter,
a criminal complaint for estafa was filed against
Roman and Magdalena, Roman was acquitted of
the charges on the ground that he merely acted as
agent of Magdalena who was the person who had
business dealings with Maxima. Magdalena was
also acquitted on the ground that there was no

misappropriation

or conversion on

her part

because she had entrusted the jewelry to Eugenia
who was the one who actually made off with It.

a) May the court in its decision impose civil
liability against Roman?
b) May the court in its decision impose civil
liability against Magdalena?
A.
a)

No, the court in its decision may not impose civil
liability against Roman.

Under S2 R111, the extinction of the penal action
also results in the extinction of the civil liability based
on delict if there is a finding in the final judgment that
the act or omission from which the civil liability may
arise did not exist.
Here the acquittal of Roman extinguished his
civil liability because the decision acquitting him
expressly said that he merely acted as an agent of
Magdalena and consequently was in no way responsible.
In effect there was a finding in the final judgment that
the act or omission from which the civil liability may
arise did not exist.
b)

Yes, the court in its decision may impose civil
liability against Magdalena.

362

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

The acquittal of Magdalena of the charge of
estafa in the criminal case did not extinguish her civil
liability, The reason was that the final judgment in the
criminal case, although finding that there was no
misappropriation or conversion on Magdalena's part,
did not contain any declaration that the act or
omission from which the civil liability might arise did
not exist. On the contrary the court found that she
received the jewelry under an agreement to return it if
unsold and that therefore her responsibility was civil
rather than criminal. Hence the court may in its
judgment order Magdalena to return the ring to
Maxima or to pay her its value. (See De Guzman v.
Alvia, 21 February 1955).
Q.

Gabat and Ligon were charged with the crime of
robbery with homicide. The prosecution alleged
that Ligon was driving a Volkswagen Kombi with
Gabat as the passenger; that while the Kombi had
stopped during a red light, Gabat beckoned the
cigarrete vendor Rosales to the window; that
when the light turned green, Gabat grabbed the
cigarette box of Rosales, who clung to the
window to try to retrieve his box; and that Gabat
pried loose the hands of Rosales who then fell to
the road and suffered fatal injuries.
On the other hand, Gabat testified that as
Rosales was engrossed trying to give change to
Gabat, the light turned green and Ligon stepped
on the gas pedal; that Rosales' cigarette box
accidentally fell inside the Kombi, that Ligon
continued driving despite Gabat's telling him to

re facts of the questlon are based on Do Guzman v. Alvla, 21
February 1955, with the modification that I have instituted the civil action ex
delicto in the criminal action, rather then making it the subject of a separate cull
action as what actually happened in De Guzman

363

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

stop; that Rosales clung to the Kombi's window
but lost his grip and fell to the pavement; and that
he told Ligon to stop and help Rosales but Ligon
drove off telling him that they should proceed
to Las Pinas and tell Gabat's parents what
had happened.

Only Gabat was arrested, Ligon became a
fugitive and was never caught. After trial, Gabat
was convicted. On appeal however he was
acquitted on the ground of reasonable doubt, the
appellate court finding the prosecution witness's
testimony not worthy of full credence. However
the appellate court in the same judgment of

acquittal found Gabat civilly liable in damages
pursuant to Article 2176 of the Civil Code on the
finding that there was negligence on his part
which led to the death of Rosales. Was It proper
for the court to make a determination that Gabat
was civilly liable?
A.

Yes. The extinction of the penal action does not carry
with it the extinction of the civil action. However the
civil action based on delict may be deemed extinguished
if there is a finding in a final judgment in the cnminal
action that the act or omission from which the civil
liability may arise did not exist. (S2 R111).
Here while the accused was acquitted of the
crime of robbery with homicide on the ground of
reasonable doubt, the court found that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise, that
is, the negligence of Gabat, did exist. Gabat acted
negligently In calling Rosales, falling to make his
driver Ligon stop when Rosales was precariously clinging
to the Kombi, and failing to come to Rosales' succor
when he fell to the road. Hence Gabat was liable for

364

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

damages pursuant to Article 2176 of the Civil Code
regarding quasi-delict. The finding of civil liability is
also in consonance with S2 (last par.) R120 which
provides that "[ijn case the judgment is of acquittal, ...

the judgment shall determine if the act or omission from
which the civil liability might arise did not exist." (People
v. Ligon, G.R. 74041, 29 July 1987, e,b., Yap, J.).
Q.

Dy was the general manager of MCC Inc. (MCCI)
Mandy, the President of MCCI, charged Dy with
estafa through misappropriation claiming that he
entrusted checks payable to cash with a total face
value of P2t million to Dy for the latter to encash
and then pay the proceeds to MCCl's creditor
bank; however Dy instead of paying the bank,
pocketed the proceeds. The RTC rendered Judgment
acquitting Dy for failure of the prosecution to
prove her guilt beyond reasonable doubt. In its
decision, the RTC found that the understanding
between Mandy and Dy was that the latter was
entitled to the proceeds of the checks, albeit with
the obligation on her part of paying MCCI's bank
loan using her own checks. The RTC thus found
that the transaction between Mandy and Dy was
really a loan. Although It acquitted Dy, the RTC In
its decision ordered her to pay Mandy P21 million.
Was It proper for the RTC to order Dy to pay Mandy?

A.

No. When the court finds that the source of obligation
is in fact, a contract, as in a contract of loan, it takes a
position completely inconsistent with the presence of
estafa. In estafa, a person parts with his money because
of abuse of confidence or deceit. In a contract, a
person willingly binds himself or herself to give
something or to render some service. In estafa, the
accused's failure to account for the property received

365

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

amounts to criminal fraud. In a contract, a party's
failure to comply with his obligation is only a contractual
breach, Thus, any finding that the source of obligation

is a contract negates estafa. The finding, in turn,
means that there is no civil liability ex delicto
Here Dy was acquitted by the RTC because of
the absence of the element of misappropriation or
conversion. The RTC found that Mandy delivered the
checks to Dy pursuant to a loan agreement. Clearly,
there is no crime of estafa. There is no proof of the presence

of any act or omission constituting criminal fraud. Thus,
civil liability ex delicto cannot be awarded because
there is no act or omission punished by law which can
serve as the source of obligation. Any civil liability
arising from the loan takes the nature of a civil liability
ex contractu. The court hearing the criminal case thus
has no authority to award civil liability ex delicto. (Dy
v. People, 800 SCRA 39 [2016], Jardeleza, J.; )."

0.

Accused entered into a contract with Roxaco
Land Corporation (RLC) regarding a construction
project. Accused in turn subcontracted Winner
Signs for the manufacture of the signs in the
project. However, despite's accused receipt of the
money from RLC, he failed to pay Winner Signs as
agreed upon. The accused was charged with

re

ruling s arguable and deserves earnest re-examination. The RTC
decsion explicitly statec that Dy was acquitted on the ground that the
prosecutlor falied to prove her guilt beyond reasonable doubt, thereby leaving
the door open to a finding as to her civil liability, as in fact the RTC so found
Evan f the judgment of acquttel was because the prosecution absolutely failed
to prove the accused's guilt, that would not recessanily preclude te court from
finding that the sct or omission from which the civif hability right anise did exist,
(See S2 RI2, which states "[i]n ether case.") rtere the omission from which
the civil liability arose, that ts, the or-payment of the loan, was found by the
RTC t exist, The ruling in effect reverses the doctnnes laid down by tbe full
court In Paaila • Court ot Appeals, 129 SCRA 558 (1984), and Peopie v Lgon
G.R 74041, 29 July 1987 Such a teversal is violative of Sec. 4(3), Art VIII of
the 1987 Consttution t is thus respectfuly submitted that the Dy ruing should
be treated property as pro tac vice

366

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

estafa through misappropriation. The accused
was acquitted of estafa on the ground that he did
not receive any money from the offended party

Winner Signs but only from RLC and thus the
obligation was only civil. May the criminal court in
Its Judgment of acquittal order accused to pay Winner
Signs the amount due under the subcontract?

A.

Yes. The evidence clearly showed that accused owed
Winner Signs the money for the signs it had constructed.
(Vicente v. People, 3 March 2021, Carandang, J.).
Note: Although the liability was ex contractu, the same
was awarded by the criminal court. I think this is the
correct rule rather than that applied in Dy v. People, supra."

Q.

What are the instances when the civil action for

the recovery of the civil liability arising from the
offense charged may proceed Independently?

.•
A.

In the cases provided in Articles 32, 33, 34, and 2176
of the Civil Code, an independent civil action may be
brought by the offended party." It shall proceed
independently of the criminal action and shall require
only a preponderance of evidence. (S3 R111) The
result of the civil action is thus independent of the
result of the criminal action. (ARTURO M. TOLENTINO,
COMMENTARIES & JURISPRUDENCE ON THE
CIVIL CODE 153 [1985]). In no case however may
the offended party recover twice for the same act or
omission charged in the criminal action. (S3 R111)

" gut see Tayamen v. People, 28 April 2021. Delos Santos, J., where Dy
v. People. was applied, incorrectly I think, since there was no absolute acquittal but
an acquittal only to a technicallty, that is, that the information charged no offense
" Aicle 31 of the Civil Coe provides that "[when the civil action is based
on an obligation not arising from the act or omission complained of as a felony
such cul' action may proceed independently of the criminal prooeeings and
regardless ot the result of the latter. Article 31 was included expressly as an
Independent civi action in the '964 Rules but deleted in the 1985 Rules.
Notwithstanding such deletion, the case mentioned in Article 31 doubtless

remains to be an independent civil action,

367

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Section 6 of the Anti-Sexual Harassment Act
provides that [nJothing in this Act shall preclude the

victim of work, education or training-related sexual
harassment from instituting a separate and independent

action for damages and other affirmative relief." Being
independent from criminal action, the conviction or
acquittal of the accused is not a bar to an independent
suit for damages in a civil action. In London v. Bagnio
Country Club, (439 Phil, 487 [2002]), the Supreme
Court allowed an independent action for damages
against the accused despite the existence of an
ongoing criminal case.
Q.

What are the cases provided for in Articles 32, 33,
34, and 2176 of the Civil Code?

A.

Liability for damages of a public officer or employee or
private individual who violates or infringes upon the
constitutional or civil rights of the offended party
mentioned in Article 32 of the Civil Code, such as
freedom of speech and of religion, and freedom from
arbitrary or illegal detention. (Article 32, Civil Code).

In cases of defamation, fraud, and physical injuries
(Article 33, Civil Code).
When a member of a city or municipal police
force refuses or fails to render aid or protection to any
person in case of danger to life or property, such
peace officer shall be primarily liable for damages,
and the city or municipality shall be subsidiarily liable
therefor. (Article 34, Civil Code).
Whoever by act or omission causes damage to
another, there being fault or negligence, is obliged to
pay for the damage done. (Article 2176, Civil Code).

368

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

Q.

ls a reservation required in order to bring an
independent civil action?

A.

No. Independent civil actions are not deemed
instituted with the criminal action and hence the right
to bring such actions need not be reserved, (Casupanan
v. Laroya, 388 SCRA 28)

Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his negligence,
X hit and injured V who was crossing the street.
Lawyer L, who witnessed the incident, offered his
legal services to V. V, who suffered physical
injuries including a fractured wrist bone, underwent
surgery to screw a metal plate to his wrist bone.
On complaint of V, a criminal case for Reckless
Imprudence Resulting in Serious Physical Injurles
was filed against X before the Municipal Trial
Court (MTC) of Sta. Maria. Atty. L, the private
prosecutor, did not reserve the filing of a separate
civil action. V subsequently filed a complaint for
Damages against X and Y before the Regional
Trial Court of Pangasinan in Urdaneta where he
resides. In his "Certification Against Forum
Shopping," V made no mention of the pendency
of the criminal case in Sta. Maria.
a)

ls V guilty of forum shopping?

b) Instead of filing an answer, X and Y moved to
dismiss the complaint for damages on the
ground of litis pendentia. Is the motion meritorious?
Explain. (10 Bar Q4)
A

a)Vis not guilty of forum-shopping
The Supreme Court has held that the lest to
determine whether there is forum-shopping is whether

369

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the second action may be barred by res judicata or lis
pendens. (Zamora v. Quinan, 29 November 2017,
Peralta, 4.).

Here the second action is one for physical
injuries and is thus an independent civil action
separate and distinct from and which shall proceed
independently of the criminal action for reckless
imprudence (Art. 33, Civil Code; S3 R111). Hence
there Is no res judicata or lis pendens and thus no
forum-shopping.
b) No the motion is not meritorious.

There is no lis pendens since the action for
damages is one for physical injuries which is an
independent civil action separate and distinct from the
criminal action for reckless imprudence. (Art. 33, Civil
Code; $3 R111)
0.

Tomas was criminally charged with serious physical
injuries allegedly committed against Darvin,
During the pendency of the criminal case, Darvin
filed a separate civil action for damages based on
the injuries he had sustained.
Tomas filed a motion to dismiss the separate
civil action on the ground of litis pendentia,
pointing out that when the criminal action was
filed against him, the civil action to recover the
civil liability from the offense charged was also
deemed instituted. He insisted that the basis of
the separate civil action was the very same act
that gave rise to the criminal action. Rule on
Tomas' motion to dismiss, with brief reasons, (17
Bar Q18)

370

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

A

The motion to dismiss should be denied. In cases of
physical injuries, a civil action for damages, entirely
separate and distinct from the criminal action, may be
brought by the injured party. Such civil action shall

proceed independently of the criminal action for
reckless imprudence (Art. 33, Civil Code; S3 R111 ).
Hence there is no litis pendentia

O.

Delia sued Victor for personal injurles which she
allegedly sustained when she was struck by a car
driven by Victor. May the court receive in evidence,
over proper and timely objection by Delia, a

certified true copy of a judgment of acquittal in a
criminal prosecution charging Victor with hit-andrun driving in connection with Della's injuries?
Why? (02 Bar Q13a)

A.

No, the court may not receive in evidence, over the
timely objection that it is irrelevant, a certified true
copy of the judgment of acquittal in the criminal case.
In cases of defamation, fraud, and physical
injuries, a civil action for damages, entirely separate
and distinct from the criminal action, may be brought
by the injured party. Such civil action shall procoed
independently of the criminal prosecution and shall
require only a preponderance of evidence. (Art. 32,
Civil Code). The result of the civil action is independent of
the result of the criminal action. (ARTURO M.
TOLENTINO, COMMENTARIES & JURISPRUDENCE
ON THE CIVIL CODE 153 [19851).
Here the civil action was for damages arising
from physical injuries. Hence it is an independent civil
action which is separate and distinct from the criminal
action and Is not affected by the outcome of the
criminal action, Thus evidence of the judgment of
acquittal is irrelevant.
371

..

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The answer would still be the same even if there
is a finding in the judgment of acquittal that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did not
exist. The Supreme Court has held that the provision
in the last paragraph of S2 R111 on the extinction of
the civil action by reason of acquittal in the criminal

case refers exclusively to civil liability ex delicto
founded on Article 100 of the Revised Penal Code. It
does not apply to an independent civil action.

(Manliclic v. Calaunan, 25 January 2007)
It has also been held that a judgment in a
criminal proceeding cannot be read in evidence in the
civil action to establish any fact there determined,
even though both actions involve the same act or
omission. The reason for this rule is that the parties
are not the same and secondarily, different rules of
evidence are applicable, (Manantan v. Court of

Appeals, 29 January 2001)."
Q.

In November 2002, Belchez was driving a passenger
bus, Mabel Tours Bus owned by respondent San
Andres. The Mabel Tours Bus sideswiped a
Toyota Revo it was overtaking. The Mabel Tours
Bus immediately swerved to the left lane but in
the process, it hit head-on the Supreme Bus
owned and registered in the name of petitioner
Supreme Bus Transportation Line, Inc., and
driven by petitioner Ruz, that was negotiating In
the opposite lane. Because of the strong impact
of the incident, the Supreme Bus was pushed to
the side of the road and the Mabel Tour Bus
continuously moved until it hit a passenger

« The suggested answer of the UP Lw Center, that the judgment mney
be received in evidence If there is a finding that the act or omission from which
the civil liability may anise did not exist, overlooks the rule that an action for
physical injuries is an Independent civil action and thus not governed by the last
paragraph of $2 R111 nor of Art. 29 of the Civil Code.

372

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

jeepney that was parked on the side of the road
which later on fell on the canal. Nobody died but
all the vehicles were damaged.
In December 2002, a complaint for damages
was brought by respondent against petitioners.
Subsequently, petitioners filed their answer with
counterclaim. They alleged among others that
plaintiff has no cause of action against them and
that the proximate cause of the vehicular accident
is the reckless imprudence of the respondent's
driver Belchez.
In the course of the trial, a criminal case for
reckless imprudence resulting in damage to property
was filed against Belchez and which resulted in
Belchez's conviction. There was no reservation of
the civil action ex delicto in the criminal case.
The RTC dismissed respondent's complaint
as well as petitioners' counterclaim. The RTC
stated that since the petitioners did not reserve
the civil action ex delicto in the criminal case,
then it was deemed instituted in the criminal case
and thus precluded the petitioners from recovering
damages through their counterclaim. Was the
dismissal of the counterclaim correct?
A.

No, The petitioners' counterclaim is based on quasidelict under Article 2176 of the Civil Code and is thus
an independent civil action which does need to be

reserved and which shall proceed independently of
the criminal action, subject to the proscription against
double recovery under Article 2177 of the Civil Code.
(Supreme Transport Liner v. San Andres, 15 Aug
2018, Bersamin, J.).

373

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

White cruising on a highway, a taxicab driven by
Mans hit an electric post. As a result thereof, its
passenger, Jovy, suffered serious injuries. Mans
was subsequently charged before the Municipal
Trial Court with reckless Imprudence resulting in
serious physical injuries.
Thereafter, Jovy filed a civil action against
Lourdes, the owner of the taxicab, for breach of
contract, and Mans for quasi-delict. Lourdes and
Mans filed a motion to dismiss the civil action on
the ground of /itis pendentia, that is, the pendency
of the civil action impliedly instituted in the
criminal action for reckless imprudence resulting
in serious physical injuries. Resolve the motior
with reasons. (05 Bar Q6),

A.

The motion to dismiss the civil action on the ground of
litis pendentia should be denied.
The civil action filed by Jovy against Lourdes is
not barred by liis
t pendentia since it involves a
different cause of action that is breach of contract,
while the cause of action in the civil action ex delicto
against Mans is the latter's reckless negligence or
imprudence.

The civil action for quasi-delict filed by Jovy
against Mans is not barred by litis pendentia.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an action
for quasi-delict is an independent civil action which
shall proceed independently of the criminal action and
regardless of its result and is thus not barred by litis
pendentia.

374

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

Q.

A criminal information for libel was filed against D
upon the sworn complaint of 0. 0 did not reserve
the filing of a separate clvll action. After the trial,
the court rendered judgment acquitting D on the
ground that he never uttered anything defamatory
or libelous against O and that O Just wanted to
harass D. Subsequently D filed a civil case for
damages with the RTC against O for filing a
malicious harassment suit. O filed a motion to
dismiss on the ground that the civil case is barred
since the same is a compulsory counterclaim which
should have been raised in the criminal case.

a) How should the judge rule on the motion to
dismiss?

b)

Assume that D did not file the civil case against
O but it was O who filed a civil case for libel
and damages against D. D moved to dismiss
the civil case on the ground of res judicata.
Should the motion to dismiss be granted.

A.
a)

The judge should deny the motion to dismiss the

civil case.
No counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party
complaint may be filed by the accused in the criminal
case, but any cause of action which could have been
the subject thereof may be litigated in a separate civil
action. (S1 R111)
b)

No. In cases of defamation, a civil action for
damages, entirely separate and distinct from the
criminal action, may be brought by the injured
party. Such civil action shall proceed independently
of the criminal prosecution. (Article 33, Civil Code).

375

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

State the effects of the commencement of the
criminal action upon the separate civil action.

A.

Deferment
After the criminal action has been commenced "?
the separate civil action arising therefrom cannot be
instituted until final judgment has been entered in the
criminal action,
Suspension

If the criminal action is filed" after the separate
civil action has already been instituted, the latter shall
be suspended in whatever stage it may be found before

Judgment on the merits. The suspension shall last
until final judgment is renders in the criminal action.
Consolidation
Nevertheless, before judgment on the merits is
rendered in the civil action, the same may, upon
motion of the offended party, be consolidated with the
criminal action in the court trying the criminal action.
In case of consolidation, the evidence already adduced in

the civil action shall be deemed automatically
reproduced in the criminal action without prejudice to
the right of the prosecution" to cross-examine the
e te context of S2 R1ft, commencement of the criminal action means
the fling of the complaint or information in count This may be deduced from the
succeeding phrase "until final judgment has been entered in the criminal action."
'pee the same considerations as in the previous note, 'the criminal action
is filed" means that the complaint or information s fled In court.
re word 'rendered should be taken to mean as entered." Since the
civii action ex delicto cannot be instituted until entry of final judgrent in the criminal
case, by parity of reasoning the suspension of the civil action ox dolicto should
also last until final judgment ls entered ir the criminal action, (MANGONTAWAR

M. GUBAT, THE REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ANNO. 119

(3"E,2009]
le submitted that prosecution" should instead be changed to accused It is
hard to imagine that the prosecution would cross-examine the witnesses of the
offended party. The accused should however be afforded the chance to crossexamine because of his constitutional right of confrontation

376

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

witnesses presented by the offended party in the
criminal case and of the parties to present additional
evidence. The consolidated criminal and civil actions
shall be tried and decided jointly.
Tolling of prescriptive period

During the pendency of the criminal action, the
running of the prescriptive period of the civil action
which cannot be instituted separately or whose proceeding
has been suspended shall be tolled (S2 R111)
Take note that these rules on deferment,
suspension, consolidation, and tolling of the prescriptive
period do not apply to independent civil actions."
Special Rule for cases falling under the jurisdiction of the
Sandiganbayan or RTC/MTC pursuant to Section 4 of P.D.
No. 1606.

Where the civil action had heretofore been filed
separately but judgment therein has not yet been
rendered, and the criminal case is hereafter filed with
the Sandiganbayan or the appropriate court, said civil
action shall be transferred to the Sandiganbayan or
the appropriate court, as the case may be, for
consolidation and joint determination with the criminal
action, otherwise the separate civil action shall be
deemed abandoned. (Sec. 4 of P.D. No. 1606, as
amended by R.A. No, 10660)
" subject to the holding in People v. Bayotas, 2 September 1994, e.b.,
Romero, J., Involving
accused's death pending appeal The Court ruled that
such death extinguished the criminal iabitty as well as the civil liability ex delicto
Th6 Count however stressed that the the private offended party need not fear a
forfeiture of his ngtt to fie a separate independent civil action by prescription, In
cases where during the prosecution of the criminal action and prior to is
extinction, the private-offended party instituted together therewitn the clvl actor
In such case, the statute af imitations on the civl liability is deemed interrupted
during the pendency of the criminal case, conforrably with Article 155 of the
Civil Code, that should thereby avoid any apprehension on a possible privation of
night by prescription

the

377

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

In 2014, Vishy recklessly drove his car and hit

Gindra inflicting serlous physical injuries upon
her, Upon the complaint of Gindra, a criminal
information for reckless imprudence resulting in
serious physical Injuries was filed In the MeTC
against Vishy, In 2018, the MeTC rendered judgment
acquitting Vishy on the ground of reasonable

doubt without pronouncement as to damages. Ir
2019, Gindra filed with the RTC a complaint for
damages against Vishy due to the physical injuries
she suffered In the 2014 incident. Vishy filed a
motion to dismiss on the ground of prescription,
arguing that the action had prescribed since it
was brought more than four years after the incident.
Should the court grant the motion to dismiss?
A.

Yes, the court should grant the motion to dismiss
based on prescription. Under the Rules or Criminal
Procedure, the suspension of the running of the
prescriptive period of the civil action ex delicto during
the pendency of the criminal case does not apply to
an independent civil action. (S2 R111)
Here the civil action to recover damages for the
injury to Gindra is an independent civil action since
the claim for damages arose out of physical injuries
(Article 33, Civil Code) Thus the prescriptive period
for the action for injury or tort, which is four years,
continued to run notwithstanding the pendency of the
criminal case. (Article 1146, Civil Code). Since the
action was brought in 2019 0r more than four years
from 2014, the action had already prescribed.

378

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

Q.

Teresita filed with the RTC an action for legal
separation against her husband Froilan, with
application for support and payment of damages.
Subsequently Teresita fifed with the MTC a
criminal complaint for concubinage against Froilan.
In the civil case, an appllcatlon for support pendente
lite was filed by Teresita and granted by the judge.

Frollan contends that the civil action for legal
separation and the incidents consequent thereto,
such as application for support pendente lite, should
be suspended In view of the criminal case for
concubinage filed against him by Teresita. ls
Froilan's contention correct?
A.

No. Under S2 in relation to S1 R111, the civil action
that is suspended is one "for the recovery of civil
liability arising from the offense charged." The action
for legal separation is for the purpose of obtaining the
right to live separately, with the other legal consequences
thereof, but not for the recovery of civil liability arising
from the offense charged. Hence such action, together
with any ancillary remedy that may be available
therein such as support pendente lite, ls not suspended
by the filing of the criminal action. (Gandionco v.
Poaranda, 27 November 1987).

Q.

Ramcar Inc. filed a complaint for damages against
Respondent praying that Respondent be ordered
to pay the value of the taxi owned by Ramcar
which had been stolen by Respondent. The complaint
was accompanied by an application for the
issuance of a writ of preliminary attachment, in
which it is alleged that Respondent is disposing
of his
properties in fraud
of creditors.
Subsequently an Information for theft of the taxi
was filed in court against Respondent. In the civil

379

t

t

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
case, the Respondent moved for its suspension

on the ground that the criminal case Involving the
same taxi had been filed In court.
a) Should the court grant the motion to suspend

the civil action?
b)

Assume that the court trying the civil case
granted the motion to suspend. May the court
during the period of suspenslon issue the writ
of preliminary attachment?

A.
a) Yes the court should grant the motion to suspend
the civil action. Under S2 R111, if the criminal
action is filed after the civil action arising from the
offense has already been instituted, the latter
shall be suspended in whatever stage it may be
found before judgment on the merit.

b)

Q.

Yes. Even if the civil action is suspended, the
court wheroin it is pending is not thereby deprived
of its authority to issue preliminary and auxiliary
writs, such as preliminary attachment and injunction,
appointment of receiver, fixing amounts of bonds,
and other processes of similar nature which do
not go into the merits of the case. (Ramcar, Inc.
v. De Leon, 78 Phil 449 [1947; Babala v. Aban1o,
90 Phil. 827 [1952)).

X, the mortgagee, forcibly took the mortgaged car
of O upon the alleged failure of the latter to pay
his mortgage obligation. 0 filed against X a civil
action to recover the car, Subsequently an information
for grave coercion arising from the incident was
filed in court against X. X then moved for the
suspension of the civil case.

380

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

a) Should the motion to suspend be granted?
Assume that the motion to suspend was granted.
After trial, the criminal court acquitted X on the ground

of reasonable doubt.
b) What would happen to the suspended civil action?

A.

a) Yes, the motion to suspend should be granted.
Under S2 R111, the civil action which was
instituted pnor to the criminal action shall be suspended
upon the filing of the criminal action. Here the civil
action to recover the car arises from the offense
and is thus governed by the provisions of S2 R111,

charged

b)

The suspension of the civil action shall be lifted
and the case shall proceed to final judgment.
Under S2 R111, the suspension shall last until
final judgment is entered" in the criminal action.

0.

X, the mortgagee, forcibly took the mortgaged car
of O upon the alleged failure of the latter to pay
his mortgage obligation. O filed a complaint for
grave coercion with the office of the city prosecutor.
a)

May O forthwith file a civil action to recover
the car from X?

The information for grave coercion was filed
in court. No reservation of the civil action was
made by O. After trial, the criminal court acquitted
X on the ground of reasonable doubt. The criminal
court did not make any pronouncement or finding
as to the civil liability of X,

"see Babara • Abaro, 90 Phil, 827 (1952)
word rendered" in the second sentence of the second paragraph of

re

S2 Rt1 should be read as "entered."

381

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

b) What would be the remedy or remedies of O in
order to recover or enforce the civil liability?
A.

a) No, O may not file a civil action to recover the car
from X. Under S2 R111, the civil action arising from
the crime cannot be instituted until final judgment has
been entered in the criminal action
b)

The remedy of O would be to file the civil action
for the recovery of the car against X. Under S2
R111, the civil action arising from the crime may

be instituted once final judgment has been
entered in the criminal action. Likewise Article 29
of the Civil Code provides that "[w]hen the accused
in a criminal prosecution is acquitted on the
ground that his guilt has not been proved beyond
reasonable doubt, a civil action for damages for
the same act or omission may be instituted."
O may also appeal from the civil aspect of the
judgment in the criminal case. Under S2 R120, the
judgment should have determined the accused's civil
liability and thus it was reversible error for the criminal
court not to have made such determination
Q.

What is the effect of the accused's death on the
separate civil action?

A.

The accused's death after arraignment and during the
pendency of the criminal action shall extinguish the
civil liability arising from the crime, However, the
independent civil action instituted or which thereafter
is instituted to enforce liability arising from other sources
of obligation may be continued against the legal
re:resentative of the accused after proper substitution
or against said gstate, as the case may be." The

re

lnoependent civil actions under Articles 32, 33, 34, and 2176 of the
Civil Cade must be brought against the executor or administrator or the heirs
under the auspices of R87, since these actions re based on quasi delict or tort

382

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

accused's heirs may be substituted for the deceased
without requiring the appointment of an executor or
administrator and the court may appoint a guardian
ad litem for the minor heirs. (S4 R111).

0.

Accused, who was represented by the PAO, was
convicted by the RTC of murdering Rolando
Cueno and sentenced to suffer the penalty of
reclusion perpetua and to pay civil indemnity to
the heirs of Cueno. The PAO appealed to the CA
which affirmed the RTC's judgment. The PAO appealed

to the Supreme Court. It was later learned that
accused had died during the pendency of the
case before the CA.
a) Should the judgment of the CA be set aside?

A.

b)

Assuming that the CA had learned of Cueno's
death pending appeal, may it order the substitution
of the accused by his legal representative
or heirs?

c)

What would be the remedy of the heirs of
Cueno to recover civil damages?

a) Yes since the criminal and civil liabilities ex delicto
of the accused were extinguished by his death prior to
final judgment.
Under the present Rules, the heirs of Cueno
should file a separate civil case in order to obtain
financial retribution for their loss.The lack of a
separate civil case for the cause of action arising from
quasi-delict'' leads to the conclusion that, a decade

and essentially involve unliuidated laims for damages Hwever if the
accused's liailty ls based on contract (such as a check or promissory note) or
quasi-contract, a cairn must be filed against the estate of the deceased accuse0
pursuant to R8

"he auasi-delict or tort is based on Article 33 of the Civil Code which
provides that j cases of defamation, fraud, and physical injuries, a crvi action

383

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

after Cueno's death, his heirs cannot recover even a
centavo from the amounts awarded by the CA.
(People v. Lipata, 20 April 2016, Carpio, J.)
b)

No What the CA should do is to dismiss the case
since the criminal and civil liabilities ex delicto
of the accused have been extinguished. The
substitution referred to in S4 R111 refers to that
made in the independent civil action which had
been instituted prior to the accused's death. (See
People v. Lipata, supra)

c) The remedy of the heirs of Cueno would be to file
an independent civil action for damages against
the executor or the administrator of the estate of
the deceased accused pursuant to R87. The
reason is that the damages is one arising from
tort or injury. The heirs of Cueno need not fear
that such action would be barred by prescription
since the running of the prescriptive period was
interrupted pursuant to Article 1155 of the Civil
Code. (People v. Lipata, supra, citing People v.

Bayotas, 2 September 1994, e.b., Romero, J)."
Q.

What is a prejudicial question?

A.

A prejudicial question ls a question or issue raised in
a previously instituted civil action which is similar or
intimately related to the issue raised in the subsequent

for damages, entirely separate and distinct from the criminal action, may be
brought by the Injured party"
"re holding that the running of the prescriptive period was interrupted
due to Article 1156 of the Civil Code is arguable. Clearly the running of the
prescriptive period was nat interrupted during the pendency of the criminal case
because the independent civil action had not yet been filed. Nor is the third
paragraph of $2 R111 applicable because it applies only to the action to enforce
civil liability ox delicto not to an independent civil action. The Bay0las ruling
should be considered an exceptional one applying only to the situation of the
accused dying pendente llte The Supreme Court evidently did not want the helrs
of the victim to be left without any recourse to recover civil damages

384

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

criminal action and whose resolution is determinative
of whether or not the criminal action may proceed

(S7 R111)
0.

What are the elements of a prejudicial question?

A,

The elements of a prejudicial question are: (PSD)

1) The previously instituted civil action involves an
issue similar or intimately related (sir) to the issue
raised in the subsequent criminal action.
2) The resolution of such issue determines whether
or not the criminal action may proceed. (S7 R111)
0.

What is the effect of a prejudicial question?

A.

It may be invoked to suspend the subsequent criminal
action, A petition for suspension of the criminal action
based upon the pendency of a prejudicial question in
a civil action may be filed in the office of the
prosecutor conducting the preliminary investigation or
in the pending criminal action at any time before the

prosecution rests. (S6 R111).
Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his negligence,
X hit and injured V who was crossing the street,
Lawyer L, who witnessed the incident, offered his
legal services to V. V, who suffered physical injuries
including a fractured wrist bone, underwent
surgery to screw a metal plate to his wrist bone.
On complaint of V, a criminal case for Reckless
Imprudence Resulting in Serious Physical Injuries
was filed against X before the Municipal Trial
Court (MTC) of Sta. Maria. Atty. L, the private
prosecutor, did not reserve the filing of a separate

re word 'previously before instituted was inserted in an amendment
effective on 1 December 2000. (See AM. No. 00-05-03-SC, dated 3 October 2000)

385

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

civil action. V subsequently filed a complaint for
Damages against X and Y before the Reglonal
Trial Court of Pangasinan in Urdaneta where he
resides. X moved for the suspension of the

proceedings in the criminal case to await the
decision In the civil case. For his part, Y moved
for the suspension of the civil case to await the

decision in the criminal case. Which of them is
correct? Explain. (10 Bar Q4ed)
A.

Both X and Y are not correct.
X's motion for the suspension of the proceedings

in the criminal case to await the decision in the civil
case is not correct.
A requirement for the existence of a prejudicial
question is that the civil action must have been
instituted previous to the criminal action. Here, the
civil action was instituted after the institution of the
criminal case. Hence, the civil action will not raise a
prejudicial question that would be a ground for the
suspension of the criminal case.
Y's motion for the suspension of the civil case is
likewise incorrect.
The civil case here is an independent civil action
since it is based on physical injuries or quasi-delict.
Thus it will proceed independently of the criminal
action and would not be suspended.
Q.

G was an employee of HSBC who obtained a
housing loan from it secured by a real estate
mortgage. The mortgage agreement provided that
the mortgage would become due and demandable
upon G's separation of employment from HSBC.
G was terminated by HSBC for participating in an
alleged illegal strike. The mortgage was extrajudicially
foreclosed upon G's failure to pay her housing

386

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

loan upon HSBC's demand. G argued that the
validity of her dismissal, which was the subject of
a labor case, constituted a prejudiclal question to
the foroclosure of the mortgage. ls G's argument

correct?
A.

No. The rule on prejudicial questions finds application
only in criminal cases. Since the present case is for

annulment of the foreclosure sale and does not in any
way Involve a criminal complaint. the concept of
prejudicial question is inapplicable. (/HSBC v. Galang,
30 June 2021, Lazaro-Javier, J.).
Q.

Carlos filed an action against Doris and Beth to
nullify the deed of sale executed by Doris In favor
of Beth, alleging that Doris had previously sold
him the same property, subject of the deed of sale

in question, Doris denied having executed the
deed of sale in favor of Carlos, alleging in her answer
that her signature in the deed of sale to Carlos was
a forgery. In view of this, the prosecutor filed an
Information against Doris for estafa for having
sold the same property twice. Doris filed a motion
to suspend the hearing of the criminal case until
the civil case has been finally decided on the
ground of the existence of a prejudicial question.
Is the ground relied upon by Doris tenable? Why?
(82 Bar 013).

A.

Yes. A prejudicial question Is a question In a
previously instituted civil action involving an issue
similar or intimately related to the issue raised in the
subsequent criminal action and whose resolution is
determinative of whether or not the criminal action
may proceed.

387

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here the issue in the civil case is intimately
related to the issue of forgery in the criminal case and
determinative of whether the criminal case may
proceed or not. If the court resolves that Doris's
signature to the deed of sale in favor of Carlos was a
forgery, then there would be no double sale and Doris
cannot be held liable for estafa. (Ras v. Rasul, 100

SCRA 125 (19801)."
•

San Miguel Properties Inc. (SMPI) bought several
subdivision lots from BF Homes Inc. BF Homes
was represented then by Its receiver, Atty. Orendain,
BF Homes withheld delivery of 20 certificates of
titles, although SMPI had fully paid for the lots, on
the allegation that Atty. Orendain was no longer
the receiver at the time of the sale of the
questioned lots. Thus on 15 August 2000, SMPL
filed a complaint-affidavit in the Office of the City
Prosecutor charging respondent directors and
officers of BF Homes with non-delivery of titles in
violation of Section 25, in relation to Section 39, of
Presidential Decree No. 957. At the same time,
SMPI sued BF Homes for specific performance in
the HLURB, praying to compel BF Homes to
release the 20 TCTs in its favor. BF Homes moved
to suspend the preliminary investigation on the
ground that the HLURB case presented a
prejudicial question. SMPI argued that the HLURB
case would not raise a prejudicial question since
it was not a civil case and since the one who filed
the HLURB case was not BF Homes but SMPI.
Should the motion to suspend on the ground of
prejudicial question be granted?

A substantially similar bar question (based also on FR'as • Rasul) was
asked in the 1999 Remedial Law Bar Exam (Question No. 13[b]). This Just goes
to show that bar questions based on leading or textbook cases are not
infrequent!y repeated in succoeding bar exams.

388

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

A.

Yes. The resolution of the HLURB case would
necessarily determine whether the criminal case for
failure to deliver title would proceed. If the HLURB
would determine that BF Homes was not obligated to
deliver the title because of the lack of authority of Atty.

Orendain, that would mean that the criminal case
would have no leg to stand on.

The concept of a prejudicial question involves a

civil action and a criminal case. Yet, contrary to
SMPl's submission that there could be no prejudicial
question to speak of because no civil action where the
prejudicial question arose was pending, the action for
specific performance in the HLURB raises a prejudicial
question that sufficed to suspend the proceedings
determining the charge for the criminal violation of
Section 25 of P.D. No 957. This is true simply
because the action for specific performance was an
action civil in nature but could not be instituted
elsewhere except in the HLURB, whose jurisdiction
over the action was exclusive and original.
SMPI's submission that BF Homes could not
raise a prejudicial question as a ground for suspension
because BF Homes had not itself initiated the HLURB
case is without merit. There is no rule that the
defense of a prejudicial question may be filed only by
the party who filed or initiated the previous case.
Where the law does not distinguish, neither should
the court do so. (San Miguel Properties, Inc. v. Perez,
GR. No. 166836, 4 September 2013)."°

"A te tmne (15 August 2000) te criminal complaint was filea, the
requirement that the civil action should be instituted previously (eff. December
2000) was not yet issued by the Supreme Court.

389

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

A.

The Spouses Gaditano issued checks to San
Miguel Corporation for beer products purchased
by them on wholesale. When the checks were
deposited by SMC, they were dishonored on the
ground of insufficient funds. It turned out that
AsiaTrust Bank had extrajudicially garnished the
savings bank account of the Spouses Gadltano
which was used to fund their checking account under
an automatic transfer arrangement. In October
2000 the Spouses Gaditano filed an action for
specific performance against AsiaTrust Bank seeking
the lifting of AsiaTrust Bank's garnishment. In
March 2001 SMC filed a criminal complaint for
violation of B.P. Blg. 22 against the Spouses
Gaditano with the City Prosecutor of Quezon City.
The Spouses Gaditano moved for the suspension
of the criminal proceedings pending resolution of
the action for specific performance which they
aver is a prejudicial question. The City Prosecutor
granted the motion of the Spouses Gaditano.
Was the resolution of the civil case for specific
performance a prejudicial question?
No. The gravamen of the violation of B.P. Blg. 22 is

the issuance of a worthless check. SMC had nothing

to do with the garnishment by AsiaTrust Bank of the
Spouses Gaditano's savings account. The Spouses
Gaditano should have funded the check upon notice
of dishonor. (Spouses Gaditano v. San Miguel Corp.
24 July 2013, Perez, J.).
Q.

Solomon and Faith got married In 2005. In 2010,
Solomon contracted a second marriage with Hope.
When Faith found out about the second marriage
of Solomon and Hope, she filed a criminal case
for bigamy before the Regional Trial Court (RTC)
of Manila sometime in 2011. Meanwhile, Solomon
filed a petition for declaration of nullity of his first
390

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

marriage with Faith in 2012, while the case for
bigamy before the RTC of Manila is ongoing.
Subsequently, Solomon filed a motion to suspend
the proceedings in the bigamy case on the ground
of prejudicial question. He asserts that the
proceedings in the criminal case should be
suspended because if his first marriage with Faith
will be declared null and void, it will have the
effect of exculpating him from the crime of
bigamy. Decide. (2014 Bar 024).

A.

Motion to suspend proceedings denied. Under the
Rules of Criminal Procedure, a requirement of a
prejudicial question is that it must have arisen from a
previously filed civil action. Here the civil action for
declaration of nullity of marriage was filed after the
criminal action for bigamy. Hence it cannot give rise to
a prejudicial question.

Q.

The petitioner, a man, contracted marriage with
W1. Subsequently, petitioner contracted marriage
with another woman, W2. Stung by this betrayal,
Wt filed a complaint for bigamy against the
petitioner. The petitioner's defense was that his
marriage with W1 was void because of the absence
of a marriage license. The petitioner was however
convicted by the RTC of Las Pinas City since
there was no prior judicial declaration of his
marriage with W1 at the time he married W2. The
Court of Appeals affirmed the petitioner's conviction.
The RTC and the CA invoked Article 40 of the
Family Code which requires a prior Judicial
declaration of nullity for remarriage. The case was
elevated to the Supreme Court. While the case
was pending in the Supreme Court, a judgment
was entered by the RTC of Imus, Cavite, declaring

391

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the marriage between the petitioner and W1 as
void due to the absence of a marriage license. Will
the judgment of the RTC of Imus, Cavite, exonerate

the petitioner from criminal liability?

A

Yes. For bigamy to arise, there must have been a
prior valid marriage. The fact that the judicial
declaration of nullity was obtained after the accused
had contracted the second marriage will still not give
rise to bigamy because a void marriage is inexistent
from the very beginning.
With respect to Article 40 of the Family Code, its
application to a bigamy charge was not warranted.
By the express terms of Article 40, the prior judicial
declaration of nullity of the marriage is a requirement
only for purposes of remarriage. Article 40 should not
be construed as imposing a requirement for the accused
to raise the defense of nullity of the first marriage.
(Pulido v. People, 27 July 2021, e.b., Hernando, J,)."

a.

Horace contracted marriage with Annika. Horace
then filed a petition for declaration of nullity of his
marriage to Annika on the ground of absence of a
marriage license. While this petition was pending,
Horace contracted a second marriage with Blondie.
When Annika learned of this, she filed a criminal
complaint with the prosecutor for bigamy against
Horace. The information for bigamy against Horace
was subsequently filed in court.

a)

Horace filed a motion for suspension of the
criminal case on the ground that the marriage
nullification case presented a prejudicial question.
Should the motion be granted?

"piuo overturns previous decisions which held that a person who
contracts a second marriage without a prior court declaration of nullity of his first
marriage was liable foe bigamy even if the first marriage was subsequently declared
void by a court. e.g. Vitangcol v. People, G.RR. No, 207406, 13 January 2016.

392

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

b)

A.

Assume that no motion for suspension was
filed. During the pendency of the criminal case,
judgment was entered in the marriage nullification
case declaring the marriage between Horace
and Annika as void because of the absence of
a marriage license, Will the judgment exonerate
Horace from criminal liability?

a) Yes, the motion should be grantsd. The resolution
of the issue of whether the prior marriage between
Horace and Annika is valid is determinative of whether
the criminal case for bigamy will proceed. Thus, the
petition for declaration of nullity of Horace's marnage
to Annika would raise a prejudicial question. This ls
because If Horace's marriage to Annika Is declared as
void, there is no prior valid marriage which is an
element of the crime of bigamy.

b) Yes. For bigamy to arise, there must have been a
prior valid marriage. The fact that the judicial
declaration of nullity was obtained after the accused
had contracted the second marriage will still not
give rise to bigamy because a void marriage is
inexistent from the very beginning. (Pulido v.
People, 27 July 2021, e.b., Hernando, J.)
Q.

Marla filed in October 2004 an action for frustrated
parricide against Joselito before the Regional Trial
Court of Quezon City, which was raffled to Branch
223 (RTC Quezon City). On February 2005, Joselito
received summons to appear before the Regional
Trial Court of Antipolo City for the pre-trial and
trial of a civil case for declaration of nullity of
marriage under Article 36 of the Family Code on
the ground of psychological incapacity, filed by
Maria against him.

393

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME I
Joselito filed an urgent motion to suspend
the proceedings before the RTC Quezon City on
the ground of the existence of a prejudicial question.
Joselito asserted that since the relationship between
the offender and the victim ls a key element in
parricide, the outcome of civil case for nullification of
marriage would have a bearing in the criminal
case filed against him before the RTC Quezon City.
a)

ls the resolution of the action for nullification
of marriage a prejudicial question that warrants
the suspension of the criminal case for
frustrated parricide against Joselito?

b)

Would your answer be different if the marriage
nullification case was instituted prior to the

frustrated parricide case?
A.

a) No. Firstly in order for a prejudicial question to
arise the civil action must have been instituted prior to
the criminal case, which is not the case here
b) No my answer would not be different. The resolution of
the issue of the nullity of the marriage is not
determinative of whether the criminal action may
proceed, The relationship between the offender
and the victim is not determinative of the guilt or
innocence of the accused, (Pimentel v Pimentel,
GR. No. 172060, 13 September 2010)

Q.

Alex filed a case for declaration of nullity of his
marriage with Jenny, claiming that his marriage
with her was void since Jenny had a prior valid
and existing marriage with Brando. During the
pendency of the marriage nullification case, Jenny
charged Alex with bigamy, alleging that when she
married him he already had a prior valid and
existing marriage with Evita, a fact Jenny did not
know until lately.
394

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

Alex moved to suspend proceedings in his
bigamy case on the ground of prejudicial question
alleging that in the event his marriage to Jenny
was declared void ab initio there would be no
second marriage to speak of.
1)

If you were the judge, how would you resolve
the motion? Explain.

For Questions No. 2 and 3, assume that Jenny
had no prior valid and existing marriage.
2) Suppose that Alex, instead of filing an action
for nullification of his marriage to Jenny, had
filed a complaint for annulment of his
marriage with Jenny on the ground that his
consent was obtained at gunpoint, would your
answer be the same? Explain,
3) Suppose that Alex, Instead of filing an action
for nullification of his marriage to Jenny, had
filed a complaint for declaration of nullity of
his marriage with Evita. Could Alex have the
bigamy proceedings suspended by invoking
prejudicial questlon claiming that the outcome
of the bigamy case would depend on whether
there was a prior valid and existing marriage
between him and Evita, which constitutes an
element of the crime? Explain. (95 Bar Q10 ecd)."

"p order ta make the problem more cnallenging, l edited the question by
putting the fling of the civil action ahead of the institution of the criminal case, In
tho original question, the civil action was not previously instituted, The reason
was at the time the question was asked (1995), Rule 11 did not require that the
civii case should have beon previously instituted. It was only in 1 D@camber 20OO
that Rule 11' was amended to require as an element of a orojudicial question
that the civl action must have been previously instituted.

395

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.
1)

If I were the judge, I would grant the motion to
suspend proceedings on the ground of prejudicial
question.

In order for bigamy to arise, it is required that the
second marriage would have been valid were it not for
the existence of the offender's first marriage. (People
v. Dumpo, 62 Phil. 246).

Here the civil case for nullity filed by Alex raises
a prejudicial question, since, assuming that Alex ls
able to prove his case, the second marriage would not
have been valid because it was a void bigamous marriage,
Jenny having been previously married to Brando.
2)

Yes, my answer would still be the same. In a case
involving similar facts, the Supreme Court held
that the complaint for annulment of a shotgun

marriage raises a prejudicial question, since
annulment on that ground would prove that the
accused's act In contracting the second marriage
was involuntary, hence exempting him from criminal
liability. (Prado v. People, 133 SCRA 602 [1984])
3)

Yes. The resolution of the issue of whether the
prior marriage between Alex and Evita is valid is
determinative of whether the criminal case for
bigamy will proceed. Thus, the petition for declaration
of nullity of Alex's marriage to Evita would raise a
prejudicial question. This is because if Alex's
marriage to Evita is declared as void, there is no
prior valid marriage which is an element of the
crime of bigamy. (Pulido v. People, 27 July 2021,
e.b., Hernando, J.).

396

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

Q.

Petitioner was validly married to X. Petitioner then

married Y. After a falling out with Y, Petitioner
filed a petition for nullification of his marriage to Y
on the ground of psychological incapacity under

Article 36 of the Family Code. Y then filed a
criminal complaint for bigamy against Petitioner.
Petitioner filed a motion to suspend the criminal
case on the ground of prejudicial question.

a)

Should the motion to suspend the criminal
case be granted?

b) Assume that no motion to suspend was filed.
During the pendency of the criminal case, the
civil court rendered judgment declaring void
ab initio the marriage of Petitioner and Y on
the ground of psychological Incapacity under
the Famity Code. May Petitioner still be
convicted of bigamy?

A
a)

Yes. The petition for nullification of Petitioner's
marriage to Y raises a prejudicial question. An
element of bigamy is that the second marriage
would have been valid were it not for the existence
of the offender's first marriage. If Petitioner's
marriage to Y is declared void, then this element
is not present.

b)

No, since as previously stated, an element of
bigamy is not present. (Pulido v. People, 27 July
2021, e.b., Hernando, J.)."°

"putilo abandoned earlier doctrines (e.g. Tenebro v. Court of Appeals, 18
February 2004) wheh held that an individual who contracts a second marriage
during the subsistence of a valid marriage is llable for bigamy, notwithstanding
the subsequent judicial declaration tnat the second marriage ls void ab initio

397

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

•

Petitioner for himself and his mother (De la Cruz)
obtained a loan of P18 million from Unicapital
secured by a real estate mortgage on a property
allegedly owned by De la Cruz. It was later
discovered that the certificate of title over the
property was spurious and that it was actually
registered In the name of another person. Unlcapltal
demanded from Petitioner and his mother the
return of the P18 million.

In August 1999, Unicapital suod Petitioner in
the RTC for the recovery of a sum of money and
damages, with an application for a writ of
preliminary attachment. The complaint alleged that
Petitioner and de la Cruz had acted in a "wanton,
fraudulent, oppressive, or malevolent manner in
offering as security a property which they do not
own, and foisting to the public a spurious title."
Petitioner's defense was that he had acted as a
mere agent of his mother and thus should not be
held liable.
In January 2000, the city prosecutor filed
against Petitioner and De la Cruz an Information
for estafa through falsification of public document
In the RTC, Petitioner moved to defer his arraignment
on the ground of existence of a prejudicial
question due to the pendency of the civil case.
Petitioner argued that the criminal case would
have no leg to stand on if it was found that he
acted as a mere agent of his mother. Should
Petitioner's motion be granted?
A

No. It is well settled that a civil action based on
dofamation, fraud and physical injuries may be
independently instituted pursuant to Article 33 of the
Civil Code, and does not operate as a prejudicial
question that will justify the suspension of a criminal

398

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

case. This is because the result of the independent

civil action is irrelevant to the issue of guilt or innocence
of the accused.
A perusal of Unicapital's complaint in the civil
case reveals that the action was predicated on fraud.
The compiaint alleged that Petitioner and de la Cruz

had acted in a "wanton, fraudulent, oppressive, or
malevolent manner in offering as security a property
which they do not own, and foisting to the public a
spurious title. As such, the action was one that could

proceed independently of the criminal case pursuant
to Article 33 of the Civil Code and thus would not
pose a prejudicial question. (Jose-Consing v. People,

15 July 2013, Bersamin, 4,)."
Q.

Plaintiffs filed with the RTC an action to nullify a
deed of sale over a parcel of land allegedly
executed by their parents. Plalntiffs alleged that
their parents' signatures were forged. The Defendant

alleged that the signatures were genuine, Subsequently
Plaintiffs filed a complaint with the prosecutor for
estafa through falsification of public document
against the Defendant, The prosecutor filed the
information In court. Defendant filed a motion to
suspend the criminal case on the ground of
prejudicial question. The Plaintiffs opposed, arguing
that the action to nullify was based on fraud and
thus an independent civil action which could not
pose a prejudicial question. ls the Plaintiffs'

argument correct?

"t

lie submitted that the doctrine in this case should be re-examined. Tne
ruling appears to have conflated the concepts of a prejudicial question and an
indepondent civil action, which are distinct from each other, It is submitted that
an independent civll action may very well present a prejudiciel question, The
ruling severely emosculates the concept of a prejudicial question, taking inta account
that the vast majority ot civil actions ox dollato are independent civil actions

399

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The concept of independent civil actions finds no
application in this case. The main issue raised in the
civil case, the genuineness of the signature of the
Plaintiffs' parents appearing in the deed of sale, is
intimately related to the charge of estafa through
falsification of public document; the resolution of the
main issue in the civil case would necessarily be
determinative of the guilt or innocence of the
Defendant In the criminal case for estafa through
falsification of public document. Hence the criminal
case should be suspended. (Domingo v. Singson, 5
Apr 2017, Reyes, J)"°

Q.

Three deeds of sale over several parcels of land
were recorded in the registry of deeds. The spouses
Granda were indicated as the sellers, with the Uy
siblings appearing as the buyers in two deeds of
sale, while Lastrilla was the buyer in the third
deed of sale.
Rafael Granda, a grandson of the spouses
Granda (who had died In the meantime), filed a
criminal complaint for falsification against the
notary public Camenforte, the Uy siblings, and
Lastrilla, alleging that the respondents falsified
the signature of his grandparents in the deeds of
sale. In due course, the criminal informations for
falsification were filed against Camenforte and
Lastrilla and raffled to Branch 8 of the RTC of
Tacloban City.
While the criminal cases were pending,
Benjamin Granda (a son of the spouses Granda)
filed a civil complaint for nullification of the deeds of
sale and certificates of title against the Ly siblings

tis opined thet the Domingo ring, which discounted the application of
the concept of independent civil action to the issue pf prejudicial question, is
more in accord wth the lw rather than the holding ir Jose-Consing

400

RULE 111
Prosecution of Civil Action

and Lastrilla. The complaint was raffled to Branch
9 of the RTC of Tacloban City.

The RTC in the civil case rendered a decision
dismissing the complaint after finding that the
spouses Granda's signatures in the deeds of sale
were not forged, Plaintiff's appeal to the CA was
dismissed and an entry of Judgment was thereafter

issued.
Accused Camenforte and Lastrilla then filed a
motion to dismiss the criminal cases on the ground

of res judicata and the existence of a prejudicial
question, May the criminal cases be dismissed on
these grounds?

A.

The criminal cases may not be dismissed on the
ground of res judicata. There was no res judicata
since there was no identity of parties. The People of
the Philippines was not a party to the civil case for
nullification of deeds of sale and certificates of title.

The criminal cases may however be dismissed
on the ground of the existence of a prejudicial
question. The question in the civil case of whether the
signature of the spouses Granda in the deeds of sale
were forged or not is determinative of whether the
criminal action for falsification may proceed. Since the
RTC in the civil case had determined that the spouses
Granda's signatures were not forged, the continuing
prosecution of the criminal case for falsification is barred
by operation of the doctrine of prejudicial question.
Although the civil case was instituted after the

criminal case, this does not preclude the application
of the doctrine of prejudicial question. The strict
sequence of institution of the two actions as provided
for by S7 R111 is more directory than mandatory and

401

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

must give way to the chief litmus test of whether the
two actions involve prejudicial issues and facts that
are similar or otherwise intimately related so that a
resolution in one concludes the resolution in the other.
(People v. Camenforte, 14 June 2021, Caguioa, J.)."

0.

State the rule on filing fees on the civil action
deemed instituted with the criminal action.

A.

When the offended party seeks to enforce civil liability

against the accused by way of moral, nominal, temperate,
or exemplary damages (MENT) without specifying the
amount thereof in the complaint or information, the
filing fees therefor shall constitute a first lien on the
judgment awarding such damages.

Where the amount of damages, other than
actual, is specified in the complaint or information, the
corresponding filing fees shall be paid by the offended
party upon the filing thereof in court.
Except as otherwise provided in the Rules, no
filing 'ees shall be required for actual damages.

(S1la] R111)

y ts subritted that the more precise reason tor the ilsmissed of the
criminal case is res judicata specif cally, conclusiveness of judgment Strict or
'literal identity of parties is na: required for res judicata to apply; substantial identity is

sufficient, Here, there was substantial ientity ct parties betwen the civil and
crimrinal cases as both the plaint ff and the private complainant represent the
same interest. that is, tte interest of the heirs ot the spouses Grarde The
doctrire of prejudicial question will not came into play since the question in the
civil case bad already been resolved Moreover, the civil case was not instituted
prior to the criminal case. it is ais subm tied that the holding tnat the requirement of
the civil action's prior Institution is rrerely directory and not mandatory should be
limited to the fact setting of Camantorte. that is, it there was already entry of
judgment in the civil case. In such a situation, the analogous application of the
docine of prejudiciel question.is n effect an irvocation o' conclusiveness of judgment

402

RULE 111

Prosecution of Civil Action

Special rule for BP 22 case

The criminal action for violation of Batas
Pambansa Blg. 22 shall be deemed to include the
corresponding civil action. No reservation to file such
civil action separately shall be allowed. (S1[b] R111)
Upon the filing of the joint criminal and civil
actions in a BP 22 case, the offended party shall pay
in full the filing fees based on the amount of the check
involved, which shall be considered as the actual
damages claimed. Where the complaint or information
also seeks to recover liquidated, moral, nominal,
temperate or exemplary damages (MENTL), the offended
party shall pay the filing fees based on the amounts
alleged therein. If the amounts are not alleged but any
of these damages are later awarded by the court, the
filing fees based on the amount awarded shall constitute
a first lien on the judgment."
In estafa cases

In estafa cases where the offended party fails to
manifest within 15 days following the filing of the
information that the civil liability arising from the crime
has been or would be separately prosecuted, the
offended party shall pay the filing fee on· the civil
liability sought. (S21(a] R141; Ramones v. Guimoc,
13 August 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

"pe mandatory Inclusion of the civll action to recover tne amount af the
check in the cnminal actior seems to be a deprivation of a substantial night which
only the legislature can do. The action to recover the check does not arise from

cime but from contract, hence virtually treating the check as an obligation ex
delicto would deprive the offended pay ot substantial nights. One effect would
be to effectively shorten the action to recover the value ot the cneck irom ten

years to four years

403

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

In a prosecution for 8.P. Blg. 22 against the
signatory of a corporate check, may the offended
party move that the corporation be impleaded in
the B.P. 22 case?

A.

No since a corporation cannot be held criminally liable
under B.P. Blg. 22. (Gosiaco • Ching, G.R. 173807,
16 April 2009).

404

RULE 112. PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION

0.

What is preliminary investigation?

A.

Preliminary investigation is an inquiry or proceeding to
determine whether there is sufficient ground to
engender a well-founded belief that a crime has been
Committed and the respondent is probably guilty thereof
and should be held for trial, (S1 R112)

Q.

What are the four instances in the Rules of
Criminal Procedure where probable cause is needed
to be established?

A.

(1)In S1 and 3 R112: By the investigating officer, to
determine whether there is sufficient ground to
engender a well-founded belief that a crime has been
committed and the respondent is probably guilty
thereof, and should be held for trial. A preliminary
investigation is required before the fling of a complaint or
information for an offense where the penalty prescribed
by law is at least four years, two months and one day
without regard to the fine;
(2) In S6 and 9 R112: By the judge, to determine
whether a warrant of arrest or a commitment
order, if the accused has already been arrested,
shall be issued and that there is a necessity of
placing the respondent under immediate custody
in order not to frustrate the ends of justice;
(3) In S5(b) R113: By a peace officer or a pnvate
person making a warrantless arrest when an offense
has just been committed, and he has probable
cause to believe based on personal knowledge
of facts or circumstances that the person to
be arrested has committed it; and

405

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(4) In S4 R126: By the judge, to determine whether a
search warrant shall be issued, and only upon
probable cause in connection with one specific
offense to be determined personally by the
judge after examination under oath or affirmation
of the complainant and the witnesses he may
produce, and particularly describing the place to
be searched and the things to be seized which
may be anywhere in the Philippines. (Estrada v.
Ombudsman, 21 January 2015).
Q.

ls a person undergoing preliminary investigation
also deemed to be under custodial investigation?

A.

No. Hence he is not entitled to the Miranda Rights.
Thus an uncounselled confession made during preliminary
investigation is admissible against him. (People v.
Omilig, 12 August 2015, Perez, J.)

Q.

When is preliminary investigation required?

A.

Except in the case of a lawful warrantless arrest, a
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted
before the filing of a complaint or information for an
offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at
least 4 years, 2 months, and one day (4.2.1) without
regard to the fine. (S1 R112)

Q.

Who are the officers authorized
preliminary investigation?

A.

The following may conduct preliminary investigation:
(PCA NaReL)

to conduct

(a) Provincial or City Prosocutors and their assistants.
(b) National and Regional State Prosecutors.
(c) Other officers as may be authorized by law. (S2

R112)
406

RULE 112

Preliminary Investigation

0.

Give examples of other officers who are authorized
by law to conduct preliminary investigation.

A.
1) The COMELEC has the exclusive power to conduct

preliminary investigation of all election offenses
punishable under the election laws and to
prosecute the same, except as may otherwise be
provided by law. (S1 R34, COMELEC Rules of
Procedure). However the Chief State Prosecutor,
all Provincial and City Prosecutors, and/or their
respective assistants are given continuing authority,
as deputies of the COMELEC to conduct preliminary

investigation of complaints involving election
offenses. (S2 R34, COMELEC Rules of Procedure).
2)

The Ombudsman and his Deputies are authorized

to conduct preliminary investigation in all cases
involving public officers, whether falling under the
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan or the regular
courts.
3)

Special counsel designated by the Secretary of

Justice under Section 1686 of the Revised
Administrative Code have the authority to conduct
preliminary investigation.

0.

A.

Does the PCGG have the authority to conduct
preliminary investigation and to file informations
for violation of the Anti-Graft Law?
No. Hence the informations that it filed are null and
void. (People v. Romualdez, G.R. 166510, 29 April 2009).

407

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Outline in brief the procedure in conducting a
preliminary investigation. (CSC CR)

A.

(a) COMPLAINT-AFFIDAVIT The complaint shall

state

the

respondent's

address

and

shall

be

accompanied by the affidavits of the complainant and
his witnesses, as well as other supporting documents

to establish probable cause. The affidavits shall be
subscribed and sworn to before any prosecutor or
government official authorized to administer oath, or,
in their unavailability, before a notary public, each of
whom must certify that he personally examined the
affiants and that he is satisfied that they voluntarily
executed and understood their affidavits.
(b) SUBPOENA. Within 10 days after the filing of the
complaint, the investigating officer shall either
dismiss it if he finds no ground to continue with
the investigation, or issue a subpoena to the
respondent attaching to it a copy of the complaint
and its supporting affidavits and documents
(c) COUNTER-AFFIDAVIT. Within 10 days from receipt
of the subpoena with the complaint and supporting
affidavits and documents, the respondent shall
submit his counter-affidavit and that of his
witnesses and other supporting documents relied
upon for his defense. The counter-affidavit shall
be subscribed and sworn to and certified as
provided in paragraph (a)

(d) If the respondent cannot be subpoenaed or if
subpoenaed, does not submit counter-affidavits
within the 10-day period, the investigating officer
shall resolve the complaint based on the evidence
presented by the complainant.

408

RULE 112
Preliminary investigation

(e)

CLARIFICATORY HEARING. The investigating

officer may set a hearing if there are facts and
issues to be clarified from a party or a witness.
The parties can be present at the hearing but
without the right to examine or cross-examine.
They may however submit to the investigating
officer questions which may be asked to the party
or witness concerned.
(f)

RESOLUTION. The investigating officer shall

determine whether or not there is sufficient
ground to hold the respondent for trial, (S3 R112)
Q.

May the complaint-affidavits and the supporting
affidavits filed with the prosecutor for preliminary
investigation be subscribed before a notary public?

A.

Only if there is a showing that a prosecutor or
government official authorized to administer oath was
unavailable as required by Sec. 3(a) R112. If there is
no such showing the investigating prosecutor should
not accept such affidavits. (Ladlad v. Velasco, G.R.
Nos. 172070-72, 1 June 2007).

a.

Is the personal examination of the complainant a
prerequisite to a finding of probable cause In
preliminary investigation?

A.

No. If the evidence, which includes the sworn
complaint, is already sufficient to establish probable
cause (here for falsification of document), it is error for
the prosecutor to dismiss the complaint solely on the
ground that the complainant did not appear in the
clarificatory hearing directed by the prosecutor
(Sales v. Adapon, 5 October 2016, Bersamin, J.)

409

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May the

investigating

prosecutor resolve the

complaint even If the respondent cannot be
subpoenaed?
A.

Yes. S3(d) R112 allows the investigating prosecutor
to resolve the complaint based on the evidence
before him if a respondent could not be subpoenaed.
As long as efforts to reach a respondent were made,
and he was given an opportunity to present countervailing
evidence, the preliminary investigation remains valid.
The rule was put in place in order to foil underhanded
attempts of a respondent to delay the prosecution of
offenses. (Ocampo v. Abando, 11 February 2014).

Q.

The Field investigation Office of the Office of the
Ombudsman (0MB) filed a complaint with the
0MB against former Representative Cagas and
petitioner Labay for their participation in the alleged
anomalous utilization of the Priority Development
Assistance Fund (PDAF). The 0MB issued an
order directing the respondents to file their
counter-affidavits. However copies of the order
could not be served on petitioner despite diligent
efforts at his office and last known address because
he was no longer employed at the office and he
was unknown at the last known address. Hence
the 0MB issued a resolution finding probable
cause against Cagas and Labay, When Labay
learned of the resolution, he asked through his
lawyer, for copies of the complaint-affidavit and
supporting documents. Labay also prayed that
the 0MB conduct a re-investigation. His motion
for reinvestigation was denied and the criminal
case against him was filed with the Sandiganbayan
(SB). It was only after the case had been filed
with the SB that Labay was furnished with copies

410

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

of the complaint-affidavit and supporting documents.
Labay filed a motion for reinvestigation with the

SB but this was also denied. Is Labay entitled to a
remand of the case to the OMB for preliminary
investigation?
A.

Yes. Labay's right to due process violated when he
was not furnished copy of complaint-affidavit and
attachments after he had filed a motion upon learning
of the 0MB resolution. Although S3() R112 provides
that if the respondent cannot be subpoenaed the
Investigating prosecutor shall resolve the complaint
based on the evidence presented by the complainant,"

the situation, however, effectively changed when
Labay made himself available to the Ombudsman
when he requested access to the case records. The
Ombudsman had a clear opportunity to furnish
petitioner with copies of the complaint affidavit and its
supporting documents. His refusal to do so violated
Labay's right to due process. The Sandiganbayan
should have recognized these patent violations and
ordered the remand of the case to the Ombudsman
for the conduct of a proper preliminary investigation
with respect to petitioner Labay's participation in the
crimes charged. (Labay v. Sandiganbayan, 23 July
2018, Velasco, J.).
Q.

Wife filed a complaint-affidavit with the city
prosecutor against her husband for economic
abuse under Sectlon 5() of RA 9252 (VOWCHI
Act), The wife however deliberately indicated a wrong
address of her husband who thus was unable to
submit a counteraffidavit and participate in the
preliminary investigation. The prosecutor found
probable cause and filed the information with the
RTC which subsequently issued an arrest warrant
against the husband, The warrant was returned
unserved because the husband could not be
411

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

found at the given address. When the husband
learned of the filing of the case and the issuance
of the arrest warrant against him, he filed with the
RTC an urgent motion for reinvestigation and for
recall of the arrest warrant. The motion was
denied by the RTC invoking A.M. No. 11-6-10-SC,
which provides that a motion for preliminary
investigation shall only be granted when accused
was subjected to inauest proceedings. ls the
husband entitled to a preliminary investigation?
A.

Yes. The husband's right to participate in the a
preliminary investigation was curtailed when his wife

deliberately indicated a wrong address. The right to
preliminary investigation is substantive, not merely
formal or technical. As such, to deny petitioner's motion
for reinvestigation on the basis of the provisions of

A.M. No. 11-6-10-SC would be to deprive him of the
full measure of his right to due process on purely
procedural grounds. (Palacios v. People, 18 March
2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
0.

ls the respondent in a preliminary investigation
entitled to be furnished with the counter-affidavits
of his co-respondents?

A.

No. Both the Rules of Criminal Procedure and the
Rules of Procedure of the Office of the Ombudsman
require the investigating officer to furnish the respondent
with copies of the affidavits of the complainant and
affidavits of his supporting witnesses. Neither of these
Rules however require the investigating officer to
furnish the respondent with copies of the affidavits of
his co-respondents. The right of the respondent is
only "to examine the evidence submitted by the
complainant," as expressly stated in Section 3(b),
Rule 112 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure
(Estrada v. Ombudsman, 21 January 2015).
412

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

Q.

ls hearsay admissible in determining probable
cause in a preliminary investigation?

A.

Yes, probable cause can be established with hearsay
evidence, as long as there is substantial basis for
crediting the hearsay. Hearsay evidence is admissible
in determining probable cause in a preliminary investigation
because such investigation is merely preliminary, and
does not finally adjudicate rights and obligations of
parties. However, in administrative cases, where rights
and obligations are finally adjudicated, what is required
is "substantial evidence" which cannot rest entirely or
even partially on hearsay evidence. (Estrada v,
Ombudsman, 21 January 2015)

Q.

Are the objections of hearsay and res inter alios
acta available In a preliminary investigation?

A.

No, The technical rules on evidence, such as hearsay
evidence and the res inter alios acta rule, should not
be rigidly applied in the course of preliminary investigation
proceedings. The reason is that a preliminary
investigation is merely preliminary and does not finally
adjudicate rights and obligations of parties. (Estrada
v. 0MB, 31 July 2018, e.b., Carpio, J.)

0.

Describe the proceedings after the investigating
officer has determined whether or not there is a
sufficient ground to hold the respondent for trial.

A.

If the investigating prosecutor finds cause to hold the
respondent for trial, he shall prepare the resolution
and information. Otherwise he shall rscommend the
dismissal of the complaint.

413

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The investigating prosecutor shall forward the
record of the case to the
_provincial or city prosecutor
or chief state prosecutor",or to the Ombudsman or
his deputy (PC COD).

No complaint or information may be filed or
dismissed by an investigating prosecutor without the
prior written authority of the provincial or city
prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the Ombudsman
or his deputy (S4 R112)
Q.

Should the reviewing officer's prior written authority
or approval of the filing of the information under

S4 R112 appear directly In the information itself?
A.

No. The Court held that there is no law which requires
that the reviewing officer's prior written authorization

appear directly in the information itself. It may be
contained in the resolution which is presumed to be
attached to the information pursuant to Section 7(a) of
Rule 112. (Villa Gomez v. People, e.b, 10 November
2020, Gesmundo, J; PNB • Oaminal, 17 Feb 2021,
Gaerlan, J.). In Villa Gomez, the SC held that the
assistant city prosecutor (ACP) was in fact authorized
by the city prosecutor to file the information in court as
shown by the ACP's resolution recommending the
filing of the information and which resolution contains
the city prosecutor's written approval.
Q.

A state prosecutor filed an information against the
accused for the violation of the SSS Law in falling
to remit premiums. The information was approved
by the regional state prosecutor, May the information
be quashed and if so on what ground?

w known as the Prosecutor General, pursuant to the Prosecution
Service Act of 2010.

414

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

A.

Yes the information may be quashed on the ground
that the officer who filed the Information had no
authority to do so. A regional state prosecutor has no
authority to approve the filing of an information as he
ls not among the officers mentioned in S4 R112.
Since the state prosecutor did not obtain the requisite
approval under S4 R112, he had no authority to

file the information. (Tolentino v. Paqueo, 7 June
2007; 2 FLORENZ D, REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 318 [6" rev. ed., 1989)).
Q,

The accused was arrested without warrant after
an entrapment operation. After the inquest, an
information for corruption of public officials was
filed with the RTC of Makati City against the
accused. The information was signed by the
assistant city prosecutor (ACP) of Makati City and
contained his certification that it was filed with the
prior authority of the city prosecutor. After trial on
the merits and submission of the case for decision,
the RTC motu proprio issued an order dismissing
the case for lack of jurisdiction. The RTC stated
that it did not acquire jurisdiction over the case
since the information was filed without the prior
written authority of the city prosecutor, The prosecution
filed a motion for reconsideration arguing that the
lack of authority was waived by the accused when
he failed to raise this in a motion to quash, The
RTC denied the motion. The prosecution then filed
a special civil action for certiorari with the Court
of Appeals to set aside the RTC's dismissal. Will
the petition for certiorari prosper?

A.

Yes. The ACP's lack of authority to fie the information
did not implicate the trial court's subject matter or

personal jurisdiction. Lack of prior written authority or
approval by the prosecuting officers authorized to
approve and sign the same has nothing to do with a
415

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

trial court's acquisition of junsdiction in a criminal
case. Not being Jurisdictional, such ground was
waived by the accused if not raised in a motion to
quash pursuant to S9 R117. (Villa Gomez v. People,
e.b., 10 November 2020, Gesmundo, 4.). The Court
overturned the doctrine in Quisay v. People, 13
January 2016, and similar cases holding that such
lack of authority is jurisdictional.
Q.

Pedrito and Tomas, Mayor and Treasurer, respectively,
of the Municipality of San Miguel, Leyte, are
charged before the Sandiganbayan for violation of
Section 3 (e), Republic Act No. 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act). The information alleges, among
others, that the two conspired in the purchase of
several units of computer through personal canvass

instead of a public bidding, causing undue injury
to the municipality.
Before arraignment, the accused moved for
reinvestigation of the charge, which the court
granted. After reinvestigation, the Office of the Special
Prosecutor filed an amended Information duly
signed and approved by the Special Prosecutor, alleging
the same delictual facts, but with an additional
allegation that the accused gave unwarranted benefits
to SB Enterprises owned by Samuel. Samuel was
also indicted under the amended information.
Before Samuel was arraigned, he moved to
quash the amended information on the ground
that the officer who filed the same had no
authority to do so. Resolve the motion to quash
with reasons. (09 Bar Q4)
A.

The motion to quash should be granted. Under S4
R112, no complaint or information may be filed by an
investigating prosecutor without the prior written

416

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

authority or approval of the provincial or city prosecutor
or chief state prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his deputy.
The Special Prosecutor Is not mentioned among
those authorized to approve the filing of complaints
or information. Hence the Office of the Special
Prosecutor had no authority to file the information and
thus the motion to quash should be granted.
Q.

What happens when the investigating prosecutor
recommends the dismissal of the complaint but
his recommendation is disapproved by the provincial
or city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the
Ombudsman or his deputy on the ground that a
probable cause exists?

A.

Where the investigating prosecutor recommends the
dismissal of the complaint but his recommendation is
disapproved by the provincial or city prosecutor or
chief state prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his
deputy on the ground that a probable cause exists,
the latter may, by himself, file the information against
the respondent, or direct another assistant prosecutor
or state prosecutor to do so without conducting
another preliminary investigation, (S4 R112)

0.

What is the remedy of a proper party who is
aggrieved by a resolution of the provincial or city
prosecutor or chief state prosecutor?

A.

He may appeal to the Secretary of Justice by filing a
petition for review. If the Secretary of Justice reverses
or modifies the resolution of the provincial or
city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor, he shall
direct the prosecutor concerned either to file the
corresponding information without conducting another
preliminary investigation, or to dismiss or move for the
dismissal of the complaint or information with notice to
the parties. (S4 R112).

417

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May the Secretary of Justice motu proprio reverse
or modify the resolution of the provincial or city
prosecutor?

A.

Yes. (S4 R112)

Q.

May the question on whether the Secretary of
Justice committed grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction In
affirming, reversing, or modifying the resolutions
of prosecutors be the subject of a petition for
certiorari under R65?

A.

Yes, even when an administrative agency does not
perform a judicial, quasi-Judicial, or ministerial function,
the Constitution mandates the exercise of judicial
review when there is an allegation of grave abuse of
discretion. (De Lima v. Reyes, 11 January 2016,
Leonen, J; see also Elma v. Jacobi, 27 June 2012,
Brion, J,), Note however that if the resolution of the
DOJ Secretary involves offenses punishable by
reclusion perpetua to death where new and material
issues are raised, the proper remedy Is an appeal to
the Office of the President within 30 days from notice
of the resolution. (Hilboro v. Morales, 11 January
2017, Leonardo-Castro, J,, Elma, citing Memorandum
Circular No. 58, issued by the Office of the President
on 30 June 1993)

Q.

ls R65 avallable from a ruling of the Regional State
Prosecutor affirming, reversing, or modifying the
resolutions of prosecutors?

A.

Yes. The ruling of the Office of the Regional State
Prosecutor is already final and thus R65 is available.
(Mina v. Tandoc, 28 Jan 2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).

418

RULE 112

Preliminary Investigation

Q.

After the requisite proceedings, the Provincial
Prosecutor filed an Information for homicide against

X. The latter, however, timely filed a Petition
for Review of the Resolution of the Provincial
Prosecutor with the Secretary of Justice who, in
due time, issued a Resolution reversing the resolution
of the Provincial Prosecutor and directing him to

withdraw the Information.
Before the Provincial Prosecutor could comply
with the directive of the Secretary of Justice, the
court issued a warrant of arrest against X
The Public Prosecutor filed a Motion to
Quash the Warrant of Arrest and to Withdraw the
Information, attaching to it the Resolution of the
Secretary of Justice. The court denied the motion.

Was there a legal basis for the court to deny
the motion?
If you were the counsel for the accused, what
remedies, if any, would you pursue? (03 Bar Q16)
A.

a) Yes, there was a legal basis for the court to deny
the motion.

The Supreme Court has held that once the
criminal complaint or information is filed in court, any
disposition of the case, including its dismissal or
continuance, lies entirely within the discretion of the
court and thus the court is not bound by the action or
findings of the Secretary of Justice. (Crespo v.Mogul,

151 SCRA 462 [19871).

b) IfIwere the counsel for the accused, I would file a
motion for reconsideration and if denied I would
file a special civil action for certiorari with the

419

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Court of Appeals.

This is because the denial of
the motion to quash the arrest warrant and to
withdraw the information is an interlocutory order

0.

What shall the judge do after the filing of the
complaint or information?

A.

10 days from the filing of the complaint or
information, the judge shall personally evaluate the
resolution of the prosecutor and its supporting evidence
Within

in order to determine whether there is probable cause.
After his evaluation, he has three options: (DEW)
1) He may immediately dismiss the case if the evidence
on record clearly fails to establish probable cause.
2) If he finds probable cause, he shall issue a warrant

of arrest or a

commitment order when the

accused is already under custody by virtue of a
warrantless arrest.

3)

In case of doubt on the existence of probable
cause, the judge may order the prosecutor to
present additional evidence within 5 days from
notice and the issue must be resolved within 30
days from the filing of the complaint or information.
(S5 R112)

Q.

After the trial court has issued the warrant of
arrest, is It superfluous for the accused to file a
motion for judicial determination of probable cause?

A.

Yes. The issuance by the trial court of the warrant of
arrest upon filing of the information and supporting
papers implies the determination of probable cause
for the offense charged. S5 R112 provides that "if
(the judge] finds probable cause, he shall issue a
warrant of arrest." It is then superfluous for the
accused to seek the judicial determination of probable
cause on the pretext that the trial court should still

420

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigatior,

act and proceed independently of the executive
determination of probable cause to charge the proper
offense. (Balindong v. Court of Appeals. 19 October
2015, Bersamin, 4.).
Q.

If the prosecutor filed the criminal case for
violation of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs
Act despite absence of showing that the chain of
custody of evidence was observed, what may the
court do?

A.

The court may either refuse to issue a commitment
order (or arrest warrant) or dismiss the case outright
for lack of probable cause per S5 R112. (People v
Turematsu, 10 Apr 2019, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Informations for murder were filed with the RTC
against accused police officers for the murder of
11 suspected members of the Kuratong Baleleng
Gang. The accused filed a motion for determination
of probable cause. After hearing, Judge Yadao
dismissed the action for lack of probable cause.
The prosecution argued that, rather than dismiss
the criminal action outright, Judge Yadao should
have ordered the panel of prosecutors to present
additional evidence pursuant to S5 R112. Was the
prosecution's argument correct?

A.

No. S5 R112 gives the trial court three options upon
the filing of the criminal information: (1) dismiss the
case if the evidence on record clearly failed to establish
probable cause; (2) issue a warrant of arrest if it finds
probable cause; and (3) order the prosecutor to present
additional evidence within five days from notice in
case of doubt as to the existence of probable cause.

tder the Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial o! Criminal Cases
(eft. 1 September 2017), ¢ motion for judicial determination of probable cause is
a prohioitea motion
421

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

But the option to order the prosecutor to present
additional evidence is not mandatory. The court's first
option under the above is for it to "immediately
dismiss the case if the evidence on record clearly fails
to establish probable cause." It is only "in case of
doubt on the existence of probable cause" that the
judge may order the prosecutor to present additional
evidence within five days from notice. (People v. Dela
Torre-Yadao, 13 November 2012, e.b., Abad, J.).
0.

An information for murder was filed with the
Paranaque Regional Trlal Court against the PNP
Special Action Force and Highway Patrol Group
for the murder of a father and his 7-year-old daughter.
The next day the HPG officers flied an omnibus

motion for judicial determination of probable
cause and to hold in abeyance the issuance of arrest
warrants. The RTC dismissed the case against the
HPG officers for lack of probable cause since
none of the witnesses saw them actually taking
part in the shooting and on its finding that the
HPG acted merely as a blocking force. Fifty days
later, the OSG filed a petition for certiorari with
the Court of Appeals alleging grave abuse of
discretion on the part of the RTC In dismissing
the case. How should the CA act on the petition?
A.

The CA should dismiss the petition. The proper
remedy that should have taken was to appeal from
the dismissal order rendered under S5 R112. The
dismissal for lack of probable cause under S5 R112 is
a final order that should have been appealed pursuant
to S1 R122. It is a final order since it disposes of the
case, terminates the proceedings, and leaves the
court with nothing further to do with respect to the
case against petitioner HPG officers. In case of
permissible appeals from a final order in a criminal
action, the public prosecutor who appears as counsel

422

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

for the People in such an action and on whom a copy
of the final order is thus served, may file a notice of
appeal within the appropriate time since it is a notice
addressed to the RTC and not to the CA. Only the
Office of the Solicitor General, however, may pursue
the appeal before the CA by filing the required
appellant's brief or withdraw the same. Of course, the
People may refile the case if new evidence adduced
in another preliminary investigation will support the
filing of a new information against them. (Cajipe v.

People, 23 April 2014, see also People v. Sandiganbayan,
18 November 2020, Caguioa, J)
Q.

The accused filed a motion for judicial determination
of probable cause. The notice of hearing appended

to the motion was addressed only to the public
prosecutor and the clerk of court but not to the
private offended party. Was the notice defective?
A.

Yes. The notice of hearing must be addressed to all
parties concerned. (Anlud Metal Recycling Corp. v.
Ang, 17 August 2015, Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

May the judicial determination of probable cause
proceed even if the accused does not file a pertinent
motion?

A.

Yes. (Anlud Metal Recycling Corp. v. Ang, 17 August
2015, Sereno, C.J.).

Q.

ls a judge obligated to resolve first a motion to
quash before issuing an arrest warrant?

A.

No. A judge is not obligated to resolve first a motion to
quash, even if grounded on lack of jurisdiction, before

issuing an arrest warrant. Rather, S5(a) R112 requires

the judge to evaluate the prosecutor's resolution and
its supporting evidence within a limited period of only
ten days, (De Lima v. Guerrero, 10 Oct 2017, e.b,
Velasco, J.)
423

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

State the constitutional provision on warrant

of arrest.
A.

The right of the people to be secure in their persons
against unreasonable seizures of whatever nature
and for any purpose shall be inviolable, and no
warrant of arrest shall issue except upon probable
cause to be determined personally by the judge after
examination under oath or affirmation of the complainant
and the witnesses he may produce, and particularly
describing the persons to be seized. (Sec. 2, Art. Ill,
Constitution).

Q.

When is a warrant of arrest unnecessary?

A.

A warrant of arrest is not necessary in the following
cases: (CFS)
1)

Where the accused is already under custody by

virtue of a warranttess arrest.
2)

If the offense is penalized by a fine only.

3)

In criminal cases govemed by the Rule on
Summary Procedure. The court may however order
the arrest of the accused if he fails to appear
whenever required. (S5[c] R112).

Note: The phrase in S5(c) R112 which reads, "if
the accused is already under detention pursuant to a
warrant of arrest lssued by the Municipal Trial Court in
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section," should
be deleted since it refers to the situation under the
former S6(b) wherein the M TC judge conducting preliminary
investigation may issue a warrant of arrest. Since
an MTC judge can no longer conduct preliminary
investigation, the phrase has become anachronistic.

424

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

Q.

Does the record of the preliminary investigation
form part of the record of the case?

A.

No. However the court, on its own initiative or on
motion of any party, may order the production of the
record or any of its pant when: (RE)

(a) Necessary in the resolution of the case or any
incident therein; or
(b) It is to be introduced as evidence in the case by
the requesting party. (S7[b] R112)

Take note also of the SC Guidelines on Pretrial
and Discovery effective 16 August 2004 which
mandates that the judge shall prder the prosecution to
attach the records of the preliminary investigation to
the case record.
Q.

The record of the preliminary investigation was
attached to the case record. Does it form part of
the record of the case?

A.

No, unless there has been an appropriate court order
under S7(b) R112 or under the SC Guidelines on
Pretrial and Discovery effective 14 August 2004.
Without such court order, the mere fact that the record of
the preliminary investigation has been physically
attached to the case record does not mean that it ls
already part of the record.

0.

After preliminary investigation, accused who were

suspected NPA members were charged in the
RTC with murder with multiple frustrated member.
The accused filed a motion with the RTC to order
the prosecutor to change the charge from murder
with multiple murder to rebellion. After the denial
of their motion, the accused went to the Court of
Appeals on certiorari. After reviewing the record
of the preliminary investigation, the CA ruled that

425

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the provincial prosecutor acted with grave abuse
of discretion and ordered him to file a substitute
information for rebellion. Did the CA act correctly?
A,

No. The CA may not take into account the record of
the preliminary investigation as basis for finding the
prosecutor guilty of grave abuse of discretion when
such record was not presented before the trial court
and hence was not part of the record of the case.
(S7(b) R112; Office of the Provincial Prosecutor of
Zamboanga Del Norte v. CA, G.R. 125796, 27
December 2000),

Q.

Describe the investigatory procedure in cases not
requiring a preliminary investigation and not covered
by the Rule on Summary Procedure,

A.

I complaint filed with the prosecutor

If the complaint is filed with the prosecutor,
he shall act on the complaint based on the affidavits
and other supporting documents submitted by the
complainant within 10 days from its filing. The
complaint shall comply with the requirements set forth
in S3(a) R112. The prosecutor cannot require the
submission of counter-affidavits unlike in the fullblown preliminary investigation under S3 R112.
The prosecutor may take any of the following

actions: (FED)
(a) He may dismiss the case for want of probable
cause.
(b) He may filg the corresponding information upon a
finding of the existence of probable cause.
(c) He may require the complainant to submit additional
evidence. (MANGONTAWARR M. GUBAT, THE
REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
ANNO. 179 [3" ed., 2009])

426

RULE 112

Preliminary Investigation

If complaint or information filed with the MTC

If the complaint or information is filed with the
MTC, the judge shall act on the complaint or
information within 10 days after its filing. (DEWS)
1)

If within the 10-day period, the judge finds no
probable cause after personally evaluating the
evidence, or after personally examining in writing
and under oath the complainant and his witnesses
in the form of searching questions and answers,
he shall dismiss the case.

2) The judge may however require the submission of
additional evidence, within 10 days from notice,"°

to determine further the existence of probable
cause. If the judge still finds no probable cause
despite the additional evidence, he shall within 10

days from its submission or expiration of said

period, dismiss the case.
3)

When the judge finds probable cause, he shall
issue a warrant_of arrest, or a commitment order
if the accused had already been arrested, and

hold him for trial
4) However if the judge is satisfied that there is no
necessity of placing the accused under custody,
he may issue summons instead of a warrant of

arrest. ($8 R11j
0.

What is the remedy of the accused if he is not
afforded a preliminary investigation?

A.

If there is no preliminary investigation and the accused,
before entering his plea, draws the court's attention to

its absence, the court, instead of dismissing the
compare with S5 R12, wherein It «s 5 days from notioe.
lg is a unique situation wherein a sumrrons may issue in a criminal case.

427

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

information, should remand the case to the to the
prosecutor for preliminary investigation. (Larranaga v.
Court of Appeals, 287 SCRA 581)
•

A criminal information is filed In court charging
Anselmo with homicide. Anselmo files a motion to

quash the information on the ground that no
preliminary investigation was conducted, Will the
motion be granted? Why or why not? (09 Bar Q16b)
A.

No, the motion to quash should not be granted.
The Supreme Court has held that the failure to
conduct a preliminary investigation before the filing of
an information is not a ground for a motion to quash
since it is not mentioned in S3 R117. (Rodis v.
Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 71404-09, 26 October
1988; Pilapil v. Sandiganbayan, G.R. No. 101978, 7
April 1993).

Q.

What are the remedies of the accused where
the information was filed without a preliminary
investigation being conducted?

A.

The remedies of the accused are the following:
1)

File a motion to remand the case to the
prosecutor's office for preliminary investigation
The motlon should be made before the accused
pleads to the information; otherwise the objection
ls deemed waived, This motion is also available
where a preliminary investigation was conducted
but the accused was not given notice thereof
through no fault of his, as where the subpoena
was sent to the wrong address.

2)

If the accused had been validly arrested without a
warrant, ask for a preliminary investigation, after
signing a waiver of the provisions of Article 125 of
the Revised Penal Code, before the complaint or
428

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

information is filed or within 5 days from the time
he learns of the filing of the complaint or
information against him. (S6 R112).
3)

If the accused had been unlawfully arrested without
a warrant, file a motion to quash the information
on the ground that the court has no jurisdiction
over the person of the accused. (S3[c] R117)
The motion should be filed before the accused
pleads to the information; otherwise the ground is

deemed waived.
•

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituln who
has been charged under RA 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act) before the Sandiganbayan.
While Angela has posted bail, she has yet to be
arraigned. Angela revealed to you that she has
not been investigated for any offense and that it
was only when police officers showed up at her
residence with a warrant of arrest that she learned
of the pending case against her. She wonders why
she has been charged before the Sandiganbayan
when she is not in government service.

a) What "before-trial" remedy would you invoke
in Angela's behalf to address the fact that she
had not been investigated at all, and how

would you avail of this remedy?
b)

What "during-trial" remedy can you use to
allow an early evaluation of the prosecution
evidence without the need of presenting defense

evidence; when and how can you avail of this
remedy? (13 Bar Q7)
A.

a) The "before-trial remedy I would invoke in Angela's

behalf is to file a motion to remand the case to the
office of the prosecutor for preliminary investigation. I
cannot file a motion to quash the information since

429

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
absence of a preliminary investigation is not a ground

of a motion to quash nor will it justify petitioner's
release because such defect did not nullify the
information and the warrant of arrest against her.
Furthermore, the filing of charges and the issuance of
the warrant of arrest against a person invalidly
detained will cure the defect of that detention or at
east deny her the right to be released because of
such defect. (Larranaga v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
130644, 13 March 1998)

The motion to remand the case should be
availed of before Angela enters her plea. The fact that
Angela had posted bail shall not bar her from
assailing the regularity or questioning the absence of
a preliminary investigation, provided that she raises
them before entering her plea. (S26 R114 ).
b)

The "dunng-trial" remedy that I can use to a'low
an early evaluation of the prosecution evidence
without the presentation of defense evidence is a
demurrer to evidence on the ground of insufficiency
of evidence. I can avail of this remedy by filing a
motion for leave to file demurrer to evidence
within 5 days after the prosecution rests its case
and which motion for leave shall specifically state
its grounds.

0.

What ls an inquest?

A.

An inquest is a formal and summary investigation
conducted by an inquest prosecutor in cases where a
person has been arrested without a warrant and
made for the purpose of determining whether the
warrantless arrest was valid

430

RULE 112
Preliminary Investigation

0.

When a person is lawfully arrested without a
warrant for an offense which requires a preliminary
Investigation, may the complaint or information

be filed in court by the prosecutor without need of
a preliminary investigation?
A.

Yes provided an inquest has been conducted by the
inquest prosecutor. In the absence or unavailability of
an inquest prosecutor, the complaint may be filed by
the offended patty or a peace officer directly with the
proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the offended

party or the arresting officer or person. (S6 R112)
The reason for this is that there is not enough time to

conduct a preliminary investigation since Article 125
of the Revised Penal Code requires that the complaint
or information be filed within 12, 18, or 36 hours from
the arrest otherwise the arresting office would be
liable for delay in the delivery of detained persons.
Q.

May the person arrested without a warrant ask for
a preliminary investigation?

A.

Yes.
Before the complaint or information is filed, the
person arrested may ask for a preliminary investigation
but he must sign a waiver of the provisions of Article
125 of the Revised Penal Code in the presence of
his counsel, Notwithstanding such waiver, he may
apply for bail
After the filing of the complaint or information, the
accused may ask for a preliminary investigation within
5 days from the time he learns of the filing. (S6 R112)
A waiver is obviously no longer required since the
complaint or information had already beer. filed
with the court.

431

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q

A detainee who had been arrested without
warrant signed a waiver of the provisions of Art.
125 as he had opted for the conduct of a

preliminary investigation pursuant to S6 R112.
Does such waiver give the State the right to detain
the person Indefinitely? If not, up to when may
the detainee be detained?

A.

No, the waiver does not give the State the right to
detain the arrestee indefinitely. The waiver of Article
125 of the RPC does not vest upon the DOJ, PO,
BJMP, and PNP the unbridled right to indefinitely
incarcerate an arrested person and subject him to the
whims and caprices of the reviewing prosecutor of the
DOJ. The waiver of Article 125 must coincide with the
prescribed period for preliminary investigation as
mandated by S6 R112. Detention beyond this period
violates the accused's constitutional right to liberty. a
detainee under such circumstances must be promptly
released to avoid violation of the constitutional right to
liberty, despite a waiver of Article 125, if the 15-day
period" (or the thirty 30-day period in cases of
violation of R.A. No. 9165) for the conduct of the
preliminary investigation lapses. (IBP v. DOJ, 25 July
2017, e.b., Mendoza, 4.).

"g6 R112 states "15 days from its inception The IBP stated that the
person cannot be (detained for more than 15 days.

gee. 90 of the CDDA mentions 30 days from the date of ther filing."

432

RULE 113. ARREST
Q.

Define arrest.

A.

Arrest is the taking of a person into custody in order
that he may be bound to answer for the commission
of an offense. (S1 R113)

Q.

How is arrest made?

A.

An arrest is made by an actual restraint of a person to
be arrested, or by his submission to the custody of the

person making the arrest.
No violence or unnecessary force shall be used
in making an arrest. The person arrested shall not be
subject to a greater restraint than is necessary for his
detention. (S2 R113)

0.

When may a warrantless arrest be lawfully made?

A.

A peace officer or a private person may, without a
warrant, arrest a person: (JPE)
(a) When, in his presence, the person to be arrested

has committed, is actually committing, or is attempting
to commit an offense; (haa)
(b) When an offense has just been committed and he
has probable cause to believe based on personal
knowledge of facts or circumstances that the
person to be arrested has committed it (jpp); and
(c) When the person to be arrested is an escared
prisoner.
In cases falling under paragraphs (a) and (b), the
person arrested shall be forthwith delivered to the
nearest police station or jail and shall be proceeded
against in accordance with S6 R112. (S5 R113)
433

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Other Instances of lawful warrantless arrest are:
(BAD)
1)

ARRESTEE. If a person lawfully arrested escapes
or is rescued, any person may immediately pursue
or retake him without a warrant at any time and in

any place within the Philippines (S13 R113).
2)

BONDSMEN'S ARREST. For the purpose of
surrendering the accused, the bondsmen may
arrest him or, upon written authority endorsed on
a certified copy of the undertaking. cause him to
be arrested by a police officer or any other person

of suitable age and discretion. (S23 R114),
3) DEPART FROM PHILIPPINES. An accused out
on bail may be re-arrested without the need of a
warrant if he attempts to depart from the Philippines
without the permission of the court where the
case is pending. (Ibid.)
Q

On his way home, a member of the Caloocan City
police force witnesses a bus robbery in Pasey
City and effects the arrest of the suspect. Can he
bring the suspect to Caloocan City for booking
since that is where his station is? Explain briefly.
(07 Bar Q6a)

A.

No, the police officer cannot bring the suspect to
Caloocan City for booking on the reasoning that that
is the place where his station is
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, it is the
duty of the arresting officer, whether with a warrant or
not, to forthwith deliver the person arrested to
the nearest police station or jail (Sections 3 and 5,
Rule 113)

434

RULE 113
Arrest

Here the nearest police station or jail is in Pasay
City where the suspect was arrested. Hence the

police officer should have delivered the suspect there.
Q.

What is ar arrest effected in hot pursuit?

A.

It is the warrantless arrest effected pursuant to S5(b)
R113. Under S5(b) R113 two conditions must concur

for the warrantless arrest to be valid: First. The person
to be arrested has Just committed an offense. Second.
The arresting officer or person has probable cause to
believe based on personal knowledge of facts or
circumstances that the person to be arrested has
committed it. (People v. Del Rosario, 305 SCRA 740).

0.

When can we say that the person to be arrested
has just committed an offense?

A.

There must be a large measure of immediacy
between the time the offense was committed and the
time of the arrest, and if there was an appreciable
lapse of time between the arrest and the commission
of the crime, a warrant of arrest must be secured.
(People v. Del Rosario, 305 SCRA 740). Where the
arrest took place a day after the commission of the
crime, it cannot be said that an offense has just been
committed. Hence the warrantless arrest was not
lawful. (People v Del Rosario, 305 SCRA 740). Where
the person was arrested two days after the discovery
of the crime, the arrest cannot be justified under S5(b)
R113. (People v. Olivarez, 299 SCRA 635).

0.

Policemen who were on patrol received a radio
call from their camp directing them to proceed to
the place of shooting. The police forthwith proceeded
to the place indicated and upon arriving there,
they found the body of the victim. The bystanders

435

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

pointed to the accused as the one who had shot
the victim. The police then arrested the accused.
Was there a valid warrantless arrest?

A.

Yes The arresting officers acted on the basis of
personal knowledge of the death of the victim and of

facts indicating that the accused was the culprit
(People v Jayson, 282 SCRA 166). Take note that
the probable cause of the arresting officer or person is
based on personal knowledge not necessarily of the
crime but of facts or circumstances indicating that the
person to be arrested has committed the crime.
Q.

Police officers approached the accused who was
talking with another person. Upon seeing the
officers, the accused ran away. He was arrested
after a chase and drugs seized from him, May
the seized drugs be used in evidence against
the accused?

A.

No. Trying to run away when no crime has been
overtly committed, and without more, cannot be evidence
of guilt. Considering that the appellant's warrantless
arrest was unlawful, the search and seizure that
resulted from it was likewise illegal. Thus, the alleged
plastic bag containing white crystalline substances
seized from him is inadmissible in evidence, having
come from an invalid search and seizure. (People v
Edado, 7 July 2014)

Q.

Police officers arrested the accused after seeing
him in a street holding a plastic sachet. The plastic
sachet tater turned out to be containing shabu.
Was there a valid warrantless arrest?

A.

No. Accused's acts of standing on the street and
holding a plastic sachet In his hands, are not by
themselves sufficient to incite suspicion of criminal
activity or to create probable cause enough to justify a
436

RULE 113
Arrest

warrantless arrest. Hence the shabu seized from him
cannot be used in evidence for it was not incidental to

a valid warrantless arrest. The accused may have
waived his objection to the validity of the arrest by
failing to raise it before plea, but he did not waive his

right to object to the admissibility of the evidence
seized from him. (Dominguez v. People, 13 March
2019, Caguloa, J.).

Q.

Two police officers were on patrol in a street
when they were approached by two teen-agers

who said that a woman with long hair and a tattoo
on her left arm had just bought shabu. They went
to the direction indicated and saw a woman
matching the description who reeked of alcohol.
She was searched and found in possession of a
sachet of shabu. She was charged and convicted
of illegal possession of drugs. Was the shabu
admissible in evidence?

A.

No, since t was the fruit of an unlawful arrest. A
warrantiess arrest under S5(b) R113 requires that the
arresting officers have "probable cause to believe
based on personal knowledge of facts or circumstances
that the person to be arrested has committed it." A
hearsay tip by itself does not justify a warrantless
arrest. Law enforcers must have personal knowledge
of facts, based on their observation, that the person
sought to be arrested has just committed a crime. Ir
this case, records failed to show that the policemen
had any personal knowledge that a crime had been
committed by accused, as in fact, he even admitted
that he merely relied on the two teenagers' tip. That
the accused was reeking of alcohol ls not a fact or
circumstance indicating that the accused had committed
a crime. Surely, to interpret "personal knowledge" as
to encompass unverified tips from strangers would

437

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

create a dangerous precedent and unnecessarily
stretch the authority and power of police officers to
effect warrantless arrests, rendering nugatory the
rigorous requisites under S5(b ) R113. (Reyes
People, 6 June 2018, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

v

The accused was arrested by members of the
Bantay Bayan while peeing In front of his workplace, He was searched and marijuana recovered
from him. He argues that the marijuana was
inadmissible in evidence since his arrest was illegal.
Is he right?

A,

Yes. The acts of the Bantay Bayan - or any barangaybased or other volunteer organizations in the nature
of watch groups - relating to the preservation of peace
and order in their respective areas have the color of a

state-related function. As such, they should be
deemed as law enforcement authorities for the purpose
of applying the Bill of Rights under Article Ill of the
1987 Constitution to them.

The arrest here was plainly illegal since the
accused was not committing any offense when he
was arrested. Hence the marijuana being the fruit of
an illegal arrest is inadmissible in evidence. (Miguel
v. Poople, 31 July 2017, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)
Q.

In March 2003, Petitioner while driving his motorcycle
near the Naga City Police Station was flagged
down by a police officer for not wearing a helmet
in violation of a City Ordinance. While the police
officer was preparing the citation ticket, he noticed
the Petitioner was uneasy and kept getting something
from his pocket. The police officer searched the
Petitioner and discovered that he was in possession
of shabu. May the shabu seized from the Petitioner
be used in evidence against him?

438

RULE 113
Arrest

A.

No, The search was not incidental to a valid arrest.
Under City Ordinance No. 98-012, which was
violated by petitioner, the failure to wear a crash

helmet while riding a motorcycle is penalized by a fine
only. Under the Rules of Court, a warrant of arrest
need not be issued if the information or charge was
filed for an offense penalized by a fine only. As a
corollary, neither can a warrantless arrest be made for
such an offense. There being no valid arrest, the
seizure of the shabu without a search warrant was
invalid and hence the same may not be used in
evidence against the Petitioner. (Luz v. People, 29
February 2012, Serano, J,)."°
Q.

What ls the method of arrest by a peace officer by
virtue of a warrant?

A

When making an arrest by virtue of a warrant, the
officer shall inform the person to be arrested of the
cause of the arrest and the fact that a warrant has
been issued for his arrest, except when he flees or
forcibly resists before the officer has opportunity to so
inform him, or when the giving of such information will
imperil the arrest, (S7 R113)

0.

Must the officer have the warrant in his possession
at the time of the arrest?

A.

No. The officer need not have the warrant in his
possession at the time of the arrest but after the
arrest, if the person arrested so requires, the warrant
shall be shown to him as soon as practicable (asap).
(S7 R113)

"Even under R.A. No. 10054 (Motorcyle Helmet Act of 2009), the penalty
for not weaning a helmet is fine only and confiscation of the drier's lcense for
the fourth and succeeding offenses.

439

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the method of arrest by an officer without

a warrant?
A,

When making an arrest without a warrant, the officer
shall inform the person to be arrested of his authority
and the cause of the arrest, unless the latter is either

engaged in the commission of an offense, is pursued
immediately after its commission, has escaped, flees,
or forcibly resists before the officer has opportunity to
so inform him, or when the giving of such information
will imperil the arrest. (S8 R113)
Q.

What is the method of arrest by a private person?

A.

When making an arrest, a private person shall inform
the person to be arrested of the intention to arrest him
and the cause of the arrest, unless the latter is either
engaged in the commission of an offense, is pursued
immediately after its commission, or has escaped,
flees, or forcibly resists before the person making
the arrest has opportunity to so inform him, or when
the giving of such information will imperil the arrest.

(S9 R113)
Q.

Distinguish the determination of probable cause
by the prosecutor from the determination of probable
cause by the judge.

A.

The determination of probable cause by the
prosecutor is to determine whether or not there is a
sufficient ground to hold the respondent for trial while
the determination of probable cause by the judge is
for the purpose of issuing a warrant of arrest.
(People v. Gaba, G.R. No. 161083, 3 August 2010).

440

RULE 114. BAIL
•

Define bail.

A.

Bail is the security given for the release of a person in
custody of the law, furnished by him or a bondsman,
to guarantee his appearance before any court.
(S1 R114)

Q.

Give the constitutional basis of the right to bail.

A.

Ali persons, except those charged with offenses
punishable by reclusion perpetua when evidence of
guilt is strong, shall, before conviction, be bailable by
sufficient sureties, or be released on recognizance as
may be provided by law. The right to bail shall not be
impaired even when the privilege of the writ of habeas
corpus is suspended. Excessive bail shall not be
required. (Sec. 13, Art. III, Constitution).

0.

May witnesses be required to post bail?

A.

Yes under the circumstance set forth in S14 R110
and S14 R119.

Q.

What are the kinds of ball?

A.

The kinds of bail are the following; (SPCR)
(1) CORPORATE SURETY BOND. A bond furnished
by a corporate surety under which the latter
guarantees the State that the accused will appear
at subsequent proceedings.
(2)

PROPERTY BOND. An undertaking constituted
as a lien on the real property given as security for
the amount of the bail.

441

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
(3) CASH DEPOSIT

An amount deposited with the

proper government officer considered as bail
upon condition that such money will be forfeited if

the accused does not appear before the court
requiring his attendance.

(4) RECOGNIZANCE. It is an undertaking that the
accused shall appear in court and comply with its
orders. The court may allow the person in custody
to be released on his own recognizance or that of
a responsible person. (S15 R114),
Q.

When Is bail a matter of right?

A.

Bail is a matter of right before or after conviction by
the MTC and before conviction by the RTC of an
offense not punishable by death, reclusion perpetua,
or life imprisonment. (S4 R114)

Q.

When is admission to bail discretionary?

A

Admission to bail is discretionary in the following
instances:
(1) Before conviction by the RTC of an offense
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment.
(2) After conviction by the RTC of an offense not
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment.

Q

A.

May a court require that the accused be arraigned
first before his application for bail may be granted?

No. The Supreme Court has held that in cases where

t

is authorized, bail should be granted before
arraignment, otherwise the accused may be hindered
from filing a motion to quash since his arraignment

442

RULE 114

Bail

would necessarily be deferred pending the resolution
of the motion to quash. This would amount to a
substantial dilution of his right to file a motion to
quash. (Lavides v. Court of Appeals, 1 February 2000).

0.

In an Information charging them of Murder,
policemen A, B, and C were convicted of Homicide.
A appealed from the decision but B and C did not.
B started serving his sentence but C escaped and
is at large. In the Court of Appeals, A applied for
bail but was denied. Finally the Court of Appeals
rendered a decision acquitting A on the ground
that the evidence pointed to the NPA as the killers
of the victim.
1) Was the Court of Appeal's denial of A's
application for ball proper?
2) 0x (98 Bar Q13)

A.

1) Yes the Court of Appeals had the discretion

to deny A's bail application Bail is discretionary
after conviction by the RTC of an offense even if
not punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or
life imprisonment.

0.

When should bail be denied?

A.

Bail should be denied in the following instances:
(1) After conviction by the RTC of an offense and the
penalty imposed is death, reclusion perpetua, or
life imprisonment.
(2) After conviction by the RTC and the penalty
imposed is imprisonment exceeding 6 years upon
a showing by the prosecution of the following or
other similar circumstances: (REP FC)

Questions based on this holding were asked in the 2015 and 2019
Remedial Law Bar Examinations.

443

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

a) RECIDIVIST, The accused is a recidivist, quasi-

recidivist, or habitual delinquent, or has committed
the crime aggravated by the circumstance
of reiteration.
b) ESCAPED. The accused has previously escaped

from legal confinement, evaded sentence, or
violated the conditions of his bail without valid
justification. (eve)
c) PROBATION. The accused committed the offense

while under probation, parole, or conditional
pardon. (ppc)
d) FLIGHT RISK The circumstances of his case
indicate the probability of flight if released
on bail.
e) CRIME RISK. There is undue risk that the
accused may commit another crime during the
pendency of the appeal. (S5 R114).

(Note; The above circumstances are also known

as "bail-negating circumstances." [Leviste v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. 189122, 17 March 2010)).
(3)

Where the judgment of conviction has become
final, unless before finality the accused applies for
probation. ($24 R114)

Q.

Rufina Chua met Wilfred Chiok who misrepresented
himself to be a licensed stock broker and duped
Chua into investing funds with him which he later
spent. After trial, Chlok was convicted of estafa
and sentenced to 12 years of prision mayor, as
minimum, to 20 years of reclusion temporal, as
maximum. The RTC cancelled Chiok's bail on the
ground that he was a flight risk. Chiok appealed to
the Court of Appeals. Subsequently Chiok filed

444

RULE 114
Bail

with the CA a special civil action for certiorari with

application for preliminary injunction assailing the
RTC's order cancelling his bail. The CA in the
certiorari case issued an order enjoining the RTC

from arresting Chiok holding that he should not
be deprived of his liberty pending his appeal.
Was It proper for the CA to issue the order?

A.

No. Under the last paragraph of S5 R114, the
appropriate remedy to review the trial court's resolution

denying or cancelling bail is a motion to review with
the appellate court. Chiok should have filed such a
motion in the appealed case with the CA which he
himself initiated. Such a motion is an incident in his
appeal, The filing of a separate petition via a special
civil action questioning such adverse order before the
appellate court is proscribed. (Chua v. Count of
Appeals, 12 April 2007, Sandoval-Gutierrez, J.).
Q.

John Doe was charged with murder before the
RTC. His ball application was granted upon a
showing that the evidence of guilt was not strong.
However, he was convicted after trial of murder
and sentenced to reclusion perpetua. May John
Doe be allowed to remain free on his original
bail or to apply for ball pending the resolution of
his appeal?

A.

No, John Doe may neither be allowed to remain free
on his original bail or to apply for bail pending appeal.
Under S7 R114 no person charged with a capital
offense, or an offense punishable by reclusion
perpetua or life imprisonment, shall be admitted to
bail when evidence of guilt is strong, regardless of the
stage of the criminal prosecution.

445

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

John Doe's bail should be cancelled or he should

no longer be admitted to bail since his conviction
clearly imports that the evidence of his guilt is strong.
(People v. Cortez, G.R. No. 92560, 15 October 1991)
Q.

Section 13, Article Ill of the Constitution and S7
R114 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure provide
as follows:

SEC. 13. All persons, except those charged
with offenses punishable by reclusion perpetua
when evidence of guilt is strong, shall, before
conviction, be bailable by sufficient securities, or
be released on recognizance as may be provided
by law. xxx
SEC. 7. Capital offense or an offense punishable
by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, not
bailable. - No person charged with a capital
offense, or an offense punishable by reclusion
perpetua or life imprisonment, shall be admitted
to bail when evidence of guilt is strong, regardless of
the stage of the criminal prosecution. (7a)
In determining whether an offense is punishable
by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, what
is the penalty to be considered?

A.

The penalty to be considered is the prescribed
penalty, not the imposable penalty. (People v. Valdez,
8 December 2015, e.b., Peralta, J.). Prescribed
penalty is the time range of Imprisonment mentioned
in the Revised Penal Code or in the special law
punishing the offense, Imposable penally is that imposed
by the court after taking into account aggravating or
modifying circumstances which would increase the
penalty to reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment

446

RULE 114
Bail

The imposable penalty may be meted only after the
presence of attending or modifying circumstances
have been proved by evidence or by the accused's
admission or confession. (Id.).

Q.

An accused was charged with the crime of
malversation of public funds involving the amount
of P274,000. Under Article 217(4) of the Revised
Penal Code, the penalty for malversation of public
funds or property if the amount involved exceeds
P22,000.00 shall be reclusion temporal in its
maximum period to reclusion perpetua. ls the
accused entitled to bail as a matter or right?

A.

Yes. The term "punishable" in S7 R114 refers to the
prescribed penalty, not to the imposable penalty.
Prescribed penalty refers to the time range provided
for in the statute punishing an offense while imposable
penalty is that meted after trial upon establishing the
presence of aggravating or modifying circumstances
Under the penalty stated in Article 217(4), reclusion
perpetua, the maximum period, can be imposed only
if it is proved that the commission of the crime was
attended by an aggravating circumstance. (Article
64[3]). Hence reclusion perpetua is the imposable
penalty not the prescribed penalty. (See People v
Valdez, 8 December 2015, e.b., Peralta, J.), Otherwise
put, since the prescribed penalty starts with reclusion
temporal, ball is still a matter of right even if the high
end of the prescribed penalty is reclusion perpetua

0.

An accused former mayor was charged with the
complex crime of malversation of public funds
through falsification of official/public documents.
The amount alleged to have been malversed was
P274,000. Under Article 217(4) of the Revised
Penal Code, the penalty for malversation of public
funds or property if the amount involved exceeds
P22,000.00 shall be reclusion temporal in its
447

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
maximum period to reclusion perpetua. The penalty
for falsification by a public officer is prision
mayor. Article 48 concerning the penalty for complex
crimes provides that the penalty for the most

serious crime shall be Imposed in its maximum
period, The prosecution contends that the accused
Is not entitled to bail as a matter of right since the
penalty for the more serious crime in its maximum
period is reclusion perpetua. ls the accused

entitled to ball as a matter or right?
A.

Yes. The term "punishable" in S7 R114 refers to the
prescribed penalty, not to the imposable penalty. An
imposable penalty is one which is meted only after
establishing that attending or modifying circumstances
were present in the commission of the crime. Here
the penalty of reclusion perpetua may be imposed
only after it is established after trial that a complex
crime was indeed committed. Since the prescribed
penalty for the more serious crime of malversation
starts with reclusion temporal, bail is a matter of right
even if the high end of the prescribed penalty is
reclusion perpetua. (People v. Valdez, 8 December
2015, e.b., Peralta, J.).

Q.

The accused was convicted by the RTC of
homicide and sentenced to an indeterminate penalty
of 6 years and 1 day of prision mayor as minimum
to 12 years and 1 day of reclusion temporal as
maximum. Pending appeal of his conviction to the
CA, the accused applied to the CA for bail citing
the grounds of advanced age and ill health and the
absence of any of the bail-negating circumstances
under S5 R114. The accused contends that, in the
absence of any of the bail-negating circumstances,
he is entitled to bail as a matter of right Is the
accused's contention correct?

448

RULE 114
Bail

A.

No. Upon conviction of the accused by the RTC
imposing a penalty greater than 6 years but which is
not death, reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment,
admission to bail is discretionary if none of the bailnegating circumstances mentioned in Section 5 (flight

risk, crime risk,

recidivist,

habitual delinquency,

previous escape, etc.) are present. Admission to bail
is not a matter of right as argued by Petitioner. The
court may deny bail on considerations other than the
absence of the circumstances under S5 R114 as In
the court's prima facie determination that there is no

substantial ground for the reversal of the conviction.
On the other hand, if any of the circumstances are
present, the court has no option but to deny or revoke
bail. (Leviste v. Court of Appeals, G.R. 189122, 17
March 2010)
Q.

Give the rule on bail when the accused is charged
with an offense punishable by death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment.

A.

Such an accused shall not be admitted to bail when
the evidence of guilt is strong. (S7 R114).

Q.

What is the meaning of the phrase "when the
evidence of guilt is strong" in S7 R114?

A.

It means that there is evident proof or a great
presumption of the accused's guilt. Even if there is a
reasonable doubt as to the accused's guilt but if on an
examination of the entire record the presumption is
great that the accused ls guilty of the offense, then
bail should not be granted. The test is not whether the
evidence establishes guilt beyond reasonable doubt
but rather whether it shows evident guilt or a great
presumption of guilt. (People v. Cabral, G.R. 131909,
18 February 1999)

449

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

For purposes of bail, when is the strength of the
evidence of guilt determined?

A.

It is determined at the hearing of an application for
bail filed by a person who is in custody for the
commission of an offense punishable by death, reclusion
perpetua, or life imprisonment.

Q.

Who has the burden of proof in showing that
evidence of guilt is strong?

A.

The prosecution. (S8 R114).

Q

In a murder case, the prosecution did not raise
any objection to the accused's application for ball.
May the judge grant bail without a hearing?

A.

No. That the prosecutor interposed no objection to the
bail application does not relieve the judge of the duty
to set the motion for bail for hearing. (Managuelod v

Paclibon, 426 SCRA 377).
0.

Outline the procedure in the bail hearing in
offenses punishable by death, reclusion perpetua,
or life imprisonment,

A.

a) The hearing of the accused's motion for bail in
offenses punishable by death, reclusion perpetua
or life imprisonment shall be summary, with the
prosecution bearing the burden of showing that the
evidence of guilt is strong. The accused may at his
option, if he wants the court to consider his evidence
as well, submit in support of his motion the affidavits
of his witnesses attesting to his innocence.
b) At the hearing of the accused's motion for bail, the
prosecution shall present its witnesses with the
option of examining them on direct or adopting the
affidavits they executed during the preliminary
investigation as their direct testimonies.

450

RULE 114
Bail

c) The court shall examine the witnesses on their
direct testimonies or affidavits to ascertain if the
evidence of guilt of the accused is strong, The
court's questions need not follow any particular
order and may shift from one witness to another.

The court shall then allow counsels from both

sides to examine the witnesses as well. The
court shall afterwards hear the oral arguments
of the parties on whether or not the evidence of
guilt is strong.
d) Within 48 hours after hearing, the court shall issue

an order containing a brief summary of the
evidence adduced before It, followed by its
conclusion of whether or not the evidence of guilt
is strong. Such conclusion shall not be regarded
as a pre-judgment on the merits of the case that
ls to be determined only after a full-blown trial.
(Sec. 6, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective 1 May 2014)
The resolution of petition for bail shall be based

solely on the evidence presented during the bail
proceedings by the prosecution. The prosecution shall
present only pieces of evidence that are essential in

establishing that the evidence of guilt is strong. The
accused need not present evidence to contradict or
rebut the prosecution's evidence. (Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases)."

Q

During the trial, may the court consider the evidence

presented during the bail hearing?
A.

Yes. The evidence presented during the bail hearing
shall be considered automatically reproduced at the

trial. But upon motion of either party, the court may
recall any witness for additional examination unless
the witness is unable to testify. (S8 R114)
"re accused however, if he wants to, should be given the chance to
present contradicting or rebutting evidence

451

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Facing a charge of murder, X filed a petition for
bail. The petition was opposed by the prosecution
but after hearing, the court granted bail to X. On
the first scheduled hearing on the merits, the
prosecution manifested that it was not adducing
additional evidence and that it was resting its
case. X filed a demurrer to evidence without leave
of court but it was denied by the court.
1)

Did the court have the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence under the circumstances
mentioned above?

2)

If the answer to the preceding question is in
the affirmative, can X adduce evidence in his
defense after the denial of his demurrer to

evidence?
3)

Without further proceeding and on the sole
basis of the evidence of the prosecution,
can the court legally convict X for murder? (98
Bar 014).

1)

Yes the court had the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence.

A.

It is axiomatic that an interlocutory order is not
final and conclusive and may be modified or set aside
by a trial court while it has jurisdiction over the case.
Here the order of the court denying bail and
finding that the evidence of X's guilt is not strong is an

interlocutory order which may be set aside or modified
by the trial court. Hence the trial court had the
discretion to deny the demurrer even though it had
earlier ruled that the evidence of guilt was not strong

452

RULE 114

Bail

2) No X can no longer adduce evidence in his defense
after the denial of his demurrer to evidence. If the
demurrer to evidence was filed without leave of
court and the demurrer is denied, the accused
waives the right to present evidence and submits
the case for judgment on the basis of the
prosecution evidence.
3)

Yes the court can legally convict X for murder
Under S8 R114, the evidence presented during
the ball hearing shall be considered automatically
reproduced during the trial, If the court finds that
the evidence is sufficient to prove X's guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt, then it may legally convict X
for murder.

0.

What are the guidelines for the judge in fixing the
amount of bail?

A.

The judge who issued the warrant or granted the
application shall fix a reasonable amount of bail
considering primarily, but not limited to, the following
factors: (FNPC HAW PPFF)
a) Financial ability of the accused.
b) Nature and circumstances of the offense.
c) Penalty for the offense charged.
d) Character and reputation of the accused.
e) Age and health of the accused.

f) Weight of the evidence against the accused.
g) Probability of the accused appearing at the trial.
h) Forfeiture of other bail.

i)

The fact that the accused was a fugitive from
Justice when arrested.

453

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

j) Pendency of other cases where the accused is on bail.
Excessive bail shall not be required, (S9 R114)
Q.

May the Department of Justice's Bail Bond Guide

be considered in fixing the amount of bail?
A.

Yes, but it shall not be controlling upon the court.
(Sec. 1, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective 1 May 2014)

0.

Is the order of the court fixing the amount of bail
appealable?

A.

No. (Sec. 4, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective 1 May 2014)
The reason is that such an order is interlocutory

Q.

When is bail not required? (LO 62 SMS)

A.

Bail shall not be required in the following instances

1) Violation of an ordinance, a light felony, or a
criminal offense punishable by a penalty not
exceeding 6 months' imprisonment, and/or a fine
of P2,00Q where the person is unable to post the
required cash or bail bond.

(S1 RA No. 6306).

2) Criminal cases covorod by the Rule on Summar,
Procedure except wher the accusad failed to
appear when required. (S16 Rule on Summary
Procedure)

3) When a person has been in custody for a period
equal to or more than the possible maximum
imprisonment prescribed for the offense charged,
he shall be released immediately, without prejudice
to the continuation of the trial or the proceedings
on appeai, If the maximum penalty to which the
accused may be sentenced is destierro, he shall
be released after 30 days of preventive imprisonment.
(S16 R114).

454

RULE 114

Bail
4) In cases not requiring preliminary investigation nor

covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure
where the MTC judge is satisfied that there is no
necessity for placing the accused under custody,
in which case he may issue summons instead of
a warrant of arrest. (S8[b] R112)
Q.

When may a person be released on a reduced bail
or on his own recognizance?

A.

A person in custody for a period equal to or more than

the minimum of the principal penalty prescribed for
the offense charged, without application of the
Indeterminate Sentence Law or any modifying
circumstance, shall be released on a reduced bail or
on his own recognizance, at the discretion of the court
($16 R114)
Q.

When may a person be released on recognizance?
(LO 62 SPCM)

A.
1) When the offense charged is for violation of an

ordinance, a light felony, or a criminal offense, the
imposable penalty for which does not exceed 6
months imprisonment andlor P2,000 fine. (FR.A.
No. 6306)

2) When a person has been in custody for a period
equal to or more than the minimum of the principal
penalty prescribed for the offense charged, without
application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law or
any modifying circumstance, he shall be released
on a reduced bail or on his own recognizance, at
the discretion of the court, (S16 R114).

455

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

3)

When the accused has applied for probation,
pending resolution of the case but no bail was
filed or the accused is incapable of filing one.
($24 R114)

4) Where a child is detained, the court shall order
the release of the minor on recognizance to
his/her parents and other suitable persons. (S35
RA No. 9344)

5) In cases covered by the Rule on

Sumrary

Procedure where the accused has been arrested

for failure to appear when required, He may be
released on recognizance by a responsible citizen

acceptable to the court. (S16 Rule on Summary
Procedure).

0.

Once the accused is admitted to bail, may the
court Increase or reduce its amount?

A.

Yes upon good cause, When increased, the accused
may be committed to custody if he does not give bail
in the increased amount within a reasonable period.

An accused held to answer a criminal charge,
who is released without bail upon filing of the complaint
or information, may, at any subsequent stage of the
proceedings and whenever a strong showing of guilt
appears to the court, be required to give bail in the

amount fixed, or In lieu thereof, committed to custody.
(S20 R114)

a.

Where is bail filed? (GARDIN)

A.

1)GENERALLY. Bail in the amount fixed may be filed
with the court where the case Is pending, or In the

absence or unavailability of the Judge thereof, with
any RTC or MTC judge in the province, city, or
municipality

456

RULE 114
Bail

2) ARRESTED OTHER THAN WHERE CASE PENDING

If the accused is arrested in a province, city, or
municipality other than where the case is
pending, bail may also be filed with any RTC of
said place, or if no RTC judge is available, with
any MTC judge therein.
3)

RECOGNIZANCE/DISCRETIONARY. Where the
grant of bail is discretionary or the accused seeks
to be released on recognizance, the application
may be filed only in the court where the case is
pending, on trial or on appeal.

4) NOT YET CHARGED. Any person in custody who
Is not yet charged in court may apply for bail with
any court in the province, city, or municipality
where he is held. (S17 R114)

Q.

When may the bail of the accused be ordered
forfeited?

A.

When the presence of the accused is required by the
court or these Rules, his bondsmen shall be notified
to produce him before the court on a given date and
time. If the accused fails to appear in person as
required, his bail shall be declared or ordered forfeited
(S21 R114)

Q.

May the order of forfeiture be appealed?

A.

No since it is merely interlocutory and provisional.

Q.

When may the court render a judgment of forfeiture?

A.

In the order of forfeiture of the bail, the bondsmen
shall be given 30 days within which to produce their
principal and to show cause why no judgment should
be rendered against them for the amount of their bail
(PS). Within the said period, the bondsmen must (PE)

457

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

(a) produce the body of their principal or give the
reason for his non-production; and
(b} explain why the accused did not appear before
the court when first required to do so.
Failing in these two requisites, a Judgment shall

be rendered against the bondsmen, jointly and severaly,
for the amount of the bail, The court shall not reduce
or otherwise mitigate the liability of the bondsmen,

unless the accused has been surrendered or is
acquitted. (S21 R114)
Q.

ls the judgment of forfeiture appealable?

A.

Yes since it is a final order with respect to the
bondsmen. Appeal must be perfected within 15 days
from notice by the bondsmen of the judgment of
forfeiture pursuant to S6 R122 (Reliance Surety &
Insurance Co. v. Amante, 30 June 2005)

Q.

When may tho bail be cancelled?

A.

Upon application of the bondsmen, with due notice to
the prosecutor, the bail may be cancelled upon
surrender of the accused or proof of his death (SD).

The bail shall be be deemed automatically
cancelled upon acquittal of the accused, dismissal of
the case, or execution of the judgment of conviction

(ADE) ($22 R114)
0.

Is the cancellation of the bail without prejudice to
any liability thereon?

A.

Yes. ($22 R114)

Q.

Will an application for bail or admission thereto
bar objections to illegal arrest or to lack of or
irregularity of the preliminary investigation?

458

RULE 114
Bail

A.

No. An application for or admission to bail shall not
bar the accused from challenging the validity of his
arrest or the legality of the warrant issued therefor, or

from assailing the regularity or questioning the
absence of a preliminary investigation of the charge
against him (PAW), provided that the raises them
before entering his plea. (S26 R114).
Q.

After Alma had started serving her sentence for
vlolation of Batas Pambansa Big. 22, she fifed a
petition of writ of habeas corpus, citing Vaca v.
Court of Appeals where the sentence of imprisonment
of a party found guilty of violation of BP 22 was
reduced to a fine equal to double the amount of
the check involved. She prayed that her sentence
be similarly modified and that she be immediately
released from detention, In the alternative, she
prayed that pending determination on whether the
Vaca ruling applies to her, she be allowed to post
bail pursuant to Rule 102, Sec. 14, which provides
that if a person is lawfully imprisoned or restrained
on a charge of having committed an offense not
punishable by death, he may be admitted to ball In
the discretion of the court. Accordingly, the trial
court allowed Alma to post bail and then ordered
her release. In your opinion, is the order of the
trial court correct?

(a) xxx
(b) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure? (08
Bar 019).

A.

(a) xxx
(b) In my opinion, the order of the trial court is not
correct under the Rules of Criminal Procedure.

459

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

S24 R114 provides that no bail shall be allowed
after a judgment of conviction has become final and
that in no case shall bail be allowed after the accused
has commenced to serve sentence.

Here Alma had already commenced to serve
sentence. Hence bail cannot be allowed.
Q.

When may a hold-departure order (HDO) be issued?

A.

A HDO shall be issued only in criminal cases within
the exclusive jurisdiction of the RTC. (SC Cir 39-97
[19 June 1997]),

Q.

DOJ Circular No. 41 provided that the Secretary of
Justice may issue a Hold-Departure Order (HDO),
a Watchlist Order (WLO), and a Allow Departure
Order. A person against whom an HDO or WLO
has been issued cannot leave the country unless
an ADO was issued by the Secretary of Justice.
Does the Secretary of Justice have the authority
to issue HDOs, WLOs, and AOOs?

A.

No. The Constitution provides that the right to travel
can be restricted in the interest of national security,
public safety, and public health as provided by law.
DOJ Circular 41 is not a law. Hence such circular is
unconstitutional for being violative of the right to travel.
(Genuino v. De Lima, 17 April 2018, e.b., Reyes, J.)

0.

Does the Sandiganbayan have the power to issue
HDOs even If it was not mentioned in SC Circular

39.-97?7
A.

Yes. The power to issue HDOs is an inherent power
of the courts, SC Circular No. 39-97 should not be

interpreted to mean that only RTCs can issue HDOs.
What the circular intended was to exclude the issuance
of HDOs in criminal cases cognizable by the MTC.
(Garcia v. Sandiganbayan, 17 October 2018, Reyes, J.),

460

RULE 115. RIGHTS OF ACCUSED
0.

A.

What are the rights of the accused at the trial?

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall be entitled
to the following rights:

(a) To be presumed innocent until the contrary is
proved beyond reasonable doubt.

(b) To be informed of the nature and cause of the

accusation against him.
(c) To be present and defend in person and by
counsel at every stage of the proceedings, from

arraignment to promulgation of the judgment.
The accused may, however, waive his presence
at the trial pursuant to the stipulations set forth in

his bail, unless his presence is specifically
ordered by the court for purposes of identification.
The absence of the accused without justifiable
cause at the trial of which he had notice shall be
considered a waiver of his right to be present
thereat. When an accused under custody escapes,
he shall be deemed to have waived his right to be
present on all subsequent trial dates until custody
over him is regained. Upon motion, the accused
may be allowed to defend himself in person when
it sufficiently appears to the court that he can
properly protect his rights without the assistance

of counsel.
(d) To testify as a witness in his own behalf but
subject to cross-examination on matters covered
by direct examination. His silence shall not in any
manner prejudice him.
(e) To be exempt from being compelled to be a
witness against himself

461

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(f) To confront and cross-examine the witnesses
against him at the trial.
Either party may utilize as part of its evidence the

testimony of a witness who is deceased, put of or
cannot with due diligence be found in the Philippines
unavailable, or otherwise unable to testify (DOFU),
given in another case or proceeding, judicial or
administrative, involving the same parties and subject

matter, the adverse party having the opportunity to
cross-examine him, (PSC)
(g) To have compulsory process issued to secure the
attendance of witnesses and production of other
evidence in his behalf.

(h) To have speedy, impartial and public trial.
(i) To appeal in all cases allowed and in the manner
prescribed by law.
Q.

May an accused charged with the crime of other
forms of swindling under Article 316, paragraph 1
of the Revised Penal Code, which punishes "[any
person who, pretending to be the owner of any
real property, shall convey, sell, encumber, or
mortgage the same" be convicted of other forms
of swindling under Article 316, paragraph 2, which
punishes the act of any person who, knowing that
real property is encumbered, shall dispose of the
same, although such encumbrance is not recorded"?

A.

No. To uphold the petitioner's conviction for an
offense other than that charged in the Information
would be a violation of her right to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation against her.
(Estrellacdo-Mainar v. People, 29 July 2015, Brion, J.).

462

RULE 115
Rights of Accused

Q.

A criminal case for estafa was brought against
Atty. Abogado for misappropriating P1 ,500,000 which
he had collected for a corporate client in a case
handled by him. On direct examination, Atty.
Abogado's testimony was solely to the effect that
he did not receive the P1,500,000. On crossexamination, Atty. Abogado was shown a receipt
for a P1,500,000 collection in behalf of his client and
asked if the signature in the receipt was his. Atty,
Abogado objected to the question on the ground
that the answer would tend to incriminate him,
a)

Should the objection of Atty. Abogado be

sustained?
-

Atty. Abogado was also asked if he had been
convicted by final judgment of qualified theft.
b)
A.

May Atty. Abogado object to this question and
if so on what ground?

a) No, the objection of Atty Abogado should not be
sustained.
The Supreme Court has held that an accused
who takes the witness stand waives the privilege
against self-incrimination.
Here Atty. Abogado had taken the witness stand
and claimed that he had not received the P1,500,000.

Hence he can be cross-examined on the matter to
show that he had indeed received the P1 ,500,000.
b) Yes, Atty. Abogado may object to the question on
the ground that it was not covered by his direct
examination.

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
accused who testifies is subject to cross-examination
on matters covered by the direct examination. (S 1[d]
R115)

463

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here the question was on a matter not covered
by the direct examination which dealt only with a
simple denial. Hence Atty. Abogado may object to
the question.
Q.

Raulo, accused of falsification of a public document,
testified in his own behalf. On cross-examination,
he was asked to take dictation in his own writing
for the purpose of comparison. He refused. May
he be compelled to take the dictation? Explain.
(88 Sar Q18b)

A.

The answer depends on whether or not Raulo had in
his direct testimony denied falsifying the public document.
If Raulo had denied falsifying the public document,
then he may be compelled to take the dictation. An
accused who takes the witness stand is subject to
cross-examination on matters covered by the direct
examination (S1[] R115) and to such extent is
deemed to have waived the privilege against selfIncrimination.
On the other hand, if Raulo had not denied
falsifying the public document (as when he testifies
merely on his character), then he cannot be compelled to
take the dictation. Compelling him to do so would
violate his right against self-incrimination since writing
is not a purely mechanical act but requires the
application of intelligence and attention. (Beltran v.
Samson, 50 Phil. 570).

0.

Accused police officer was arrested for extortion
after an entrapment operation. He was compelled
to undergo a drug test by submitting his urine
sample. The urine sample tested positive for
drugs. Accused was convicted of the crime of use
of dangerous drugs under Section 15, Art. II of the

464

RULE 115
Rights of Accused

Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act (R.A, 9165).
He challenged the admissibilty of the urine sample
on the ground that his drug testing violated his
right against self-incrimination. Was the urine
sample properly admitted in evidence?

A.

No. The drug testing violated the accused's right
against self-incrimination. The drug test in Section 15

of RA 9165 covers only those arrested for crimes
under Art. II of RA 9165. Here the accused was
arrested for extortion not for dangerous drug use.
The rule is that the right against self-incrimination
is a prohibition against testimonial compulsion Cases
where non-testimonial compulsion has been allowed
reveal, however, that the pieces of evidence obtained
were all material to the principal cause of the arrest.

In the instant case, a urine sample is immaterial
to the charge of extortion, It is thus erroneous to hold
that the extraction of petitioner's urine for purposes of
drug testing was "merely a mechanical act, hence, falling
outside the concept of a custodial investigation." (Dela
Cruz v. People, 730 SCRA 655 [2014]))
Q.

What are the rights of a person under custodial
investigation?

A

A person under investigation for the commission of an
offense (custodial investigation) shall have the
following rights: (SC VS)
(1) Right to remain silent and right to be informed of
such right.
(2) Right to have competent and independent counsel
preferably of his own choice and to be informed of
such right. If the person cannot afford the services
of counsel, he must be provided with one. The

465

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

right to remain silent and to counsel cannot be
waived except in writing and in the presence
of counsel.
(3) The right against torture, force, violence, threat,
intimidation, or any other means which vitiate the
free will.
(4) The night against secret detention places, solitary,

incommunicado, or other similar forms of
detention (ssio). (Sec. 12, Art. III, Constitution).
Q.

What is the consequence if the confession or
admission was obtained in violation of the
foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation?

A.

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of
the foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation shall be inadmissible in evidence against
him. (Sec 12(3], Art. III, Constitution).

Q.

Arrested after a buy-bust operation, the accused
was made to sign a "receipt for property seized"
which included the shabu seized from him. Accused
contends that he was not assisted by a lawyer
when he signed the "Receipt for Property Seized;"
therefore, the document cannot be admitted In
evidence against him as his act of signing the
same is a form of confession or admission. ls the
accused's contention correct?

A.

Yes. There is no showing in the records of this case
that accused was assisted by a counsel when he
signed the "Receipt for Property Seized." It is settled
that the signature of an accused in the receipt of
property seized is inadmissible in evidence if it was
obtained without the assistance of counsel. The
signature of the accused on such a receipt is a
declaration against his interest and a tacit admission

466

RULE 115
Rights of Accused

of the crime charged; hence, the constitutional
safeguard must be observed. (People v. Endaya, 23
July 2014)
Q.

During custodial investigation, Atty. F, the
mayor's legal consultant who was supposed to
assist the accused, arrived only at 1 p.m., after the
accused had been subjected to questioning in the
police station beginning 6 a.m. Was the accused
afforded the right to counsel?

A.

No, The person under investigation must be assisted
by counsel at_all times during custodial investigation
Moreover, a legal counsel to the town mayor (in which
town the accused was held in custody) cannot be said
to be an independent counsel, The admission made
during the custodial investigation was held by the
Supreme Court to be inadmissible. (Pooplo v. Panis,
14 February 2018, Del Castillo, J.)

Q.

Accused housemaid made a confession to the
police officer interviewing her at her employer's
residence that she took her employer's jewelry.
Accused contends that the confession is inadmissible
as she was not accorded her Miranda rights. ls
the Accused's contention correct?

A.

No. The accused was not under custodial investigation
when she was being interviewed at the employer's
residence. The confession was elicited during the
initial interview of the police after the accused called
to report the missing money and personal effects. The
investigation was still a general inquiry of the crime
and has not focused on a particular suspect. Also,
she admitted to the crime while at the residence of
her employer, thus, she was not yet taken into
custody or otherwise deprived of her freedom.
(People v. Cabanada, 19 July 2017 Peralta, J.).

467

RULE 116. ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEA
Q.

What is the schedule of the arraignment and
the pre-trial?

A.

Once the court has acquired jurisdiction over the
person of the accused, the arraignment and the pretrial shall be set within 10 calendar days from date of
the court's receipt of the case for a detained accused,
and within 30 calendar days from the date the court

acquires jurisdiction (either by arrest or voluntary
surrender) over a non-detained accused. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
Under the revised guidelines, the arraignment and the

pre-trial are held on the same day.
Q.

To whom shall the notice of arraignment and pretrial be sent?

A,

The notice of arraignment and pre-trial shall be sent
to the accused, his/her counsel, private complainant
or complaining law enforcement agent, public prosecutor,
and witnesses whose names appear in the information
for purposes of plea-bargaining, arraignment, and
pre-trial. (Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases)

Q.

How is the arraignment made?

A.

The arraignment shall be made in open court by the
Judge or clerk by furnishing the accused with a copy
of the complaint or information, reading the same in
the language or dialect known to him, and asking him
whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. The accused
must be arraigned before the court where the
complaint or information was filed or assigned for trial.

(S1[a] R116)

468

C

RULE 116

Arraignment and Plea

Q.

May the reading of the information be waived?

A.

Yes. In multiple cases, the court, upon personal
examination of the accused, may allow a waiver of the
reading of the information upon the full understanding
and express consent of the accused and his counsel,
which consent shall be expressly stated in both the
minutes/certificate of arraignment and the order of
arraignment. The court shall explain the waiver to the
accused in the language or dialect known to him and

ensure the accused's full understanding of the
consequences of the waiver before approving the
same. (Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases).
Q

How is the plea made?

A,

The accused must be present at the arraignment and
must personally enter his plea.
Both arraignment and plea shall be made of
record, but failure to do so shall not affect the validity
of the proceedings. (S1[b] R116)

Q.

A.

When shall a plea of not guilty be entered for the
accused? (REC)

(1) When the accused refuses to plea or makes a
conditional plea. (S1[c] R116)
(2) When the accused pleads guilty but presents
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be deemed
withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be
entered for him. (S1[d] R116).

Q.

After a plea of guilty, the accused was allowed to
present evidence of mitigating circumstances.
The accused instead testified that he acted in selfdefense. What should the court do?

469

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A,

The court should enter a plea of not guilty for the
accused. When the accused pleads guilty but presents
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be deemed
withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be entered for
him. (S1(0) R116)

Q.

ls the private offended party required to appear at
the arraignment? What is the consequence If the

offended party fails to appear despite due notice?
A,

The private offended party shall be required to appear
at the arraignment for purposes of plea bargaining,
determination of civil liability, and other matters
requiring his presence (PCO). In case of his failure to
appear despite due notice, the court may allow the
accused to enter a plea of guilty to a lesser offense
which is necessarily included in the offense charged
with the conformity of the trial prosecutor alone. (S1[f]

R116)
This provision has been modified by the Revised

Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases
which state that plea bargaining shall proceed
provided the private offended party in private crimes,"
or the arresting officer in victimless crimes, is present
to give his consent with the conformity of the public
prosecutor to the plea bargaining.
Q.

What is plea bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the prosecutor
in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to court approval. It
usually involves the defendant's pleading guilty to a
lesser offense or to only one or some of the counts of

peyate crimes" here should not be contused with the crimes win
cannot be prosecuted de officio under S5 R110 'Private crimes" simply refers to
crimes in which there is a private offended party urlike in victimless crimes like sale of
legal drags. Tho phrase "in prvatea crimes should simply have boon omitted

470

RULE 116
Arraignment and Plea
a multi-count indictment in return for a lighter sentence
than that for the graver charge, (Black's Law Dictionary,
5" ed., 1979) In our jurisdiction however, plea
bargaining is restricted to pleading guilty to a lesserincluded offense.
Q.

A.

Section 23 of the Comprehensive Dangerous
Drugs Act disallows plea bargaining in drugs cases.
Is this provision valid?
No, the provision is unconstitutional. It infringes on the

Supreme Court's constitutional rule-making power. Plea
bargaining is a procedural matter. (Estipona v.
Lobrigo, 15 August 2017, e.b., Peralta, J.).
Q.

Sayre was charged with the offense of selling
dangerous drugs. Sayre submitted a proposal to
plea bargain the charge of Illegal Sale of Dangerous
Drugs to the lower offense of Possession of
Paraphernalia for Dangerous Drugs under Section
12 in accordance with the guidelines provided by
the Court in OCA Circular No, 90-2018. On the
other hand, the City Prosecutor argued that they
are bound by DO Circular No. 27, rejecting Sayre's
plea bargain from Illegal Sale of dangerous Drugs
to Possession of Drug Paraphernalia, and insisting
that "any plea bargaining outside the DOJ circular
is not acceptable." Since there was no agreement,
the RTC denied Sayre's motion to plea bargain
and set the case for pre-trial. Sayre seeks to
declare DOJ Circular No. 27 unconstitutional for
being in contravention with the provisions of OCA
Circular No. 90-2018. Citing the case of Estipona
v. Judge Lobrigo, Sayre argues that OCA Circular
No. 90-2018 is a rule of procedure adopted by the
Supreme Court under lts constitutional mandate
to promulgate rules concerning pleading, practice,

and procedure in all courts. Is OOJ Circular No. 27
unconstitutional?

471

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. DOJ Circular No. 27, pertaining to acceptable
plea bargain for Section 5 of R.A. 9165, did not violate
the rule-making authority of the Court. DOJ Circular

No. 27 merely serves as an internal guideline for
prosecutors to observe before they may give their
consent to proposed plea bargains. (Sayre v. Xenos,

18 Feb 2020, e.b., Inting, J.).

0.

X was charged with two counts of raping his
daughter. Upon arraignment, X pleaded guilty but
bargained for a lesser penalty for each case.
Complainant's mother and the public prosecutor
agreed with the plea bargain. Hence the trial court
rendered judgment sentencing X to ten years for
each count of rape.

(a) Was there a proper plea bargaining?

(b) If not, what should the court have done?

A.
(a)

No. X's plea is not the plea bargaining
contemplated and allowed by law and the rules of
procedure. The only instance where a plea
bargaining is allowed under the Rules is when an
accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense
necessarily included in the offense charged pursuant
to S2 R116. In such a case, the reduction of the
penalty is only a consequence of the plea of guilt
to a lesser penalty.

It must be emphasized that X did not plead to a
lesser offense but pleaded guilty to the rape charges
and only bargained for a lesser penalty. In short he
did not plea bargain but made conditions on the
penalty to be imposed. This is erroneous because by

472

RULE 116
Arraignment and Plea

pleading guilty to the offense charged, accusedappellant should be sentenced to the penalty to which
he pleaded. (People v. Magat, G.R. No. 130026, 31
May 2000, e.b.)°
(b) The court should have entered a plea of not guilty
for X.
When the accused refused to plead or makes a
conditional plea, a plea of not guilty shall be entered
for him. (S1[c) R116).
Here X made a conditional plea by admitting his
guilt provided that a certain penalty will be meted
upon him, Hence the court should have entered a plea
of not guilty. (People v Magat, supra).

0.

X was charged with murder attended by treachery
and evident premeditation. During arraignment,
X, assisted by counsel, pleased guilty with the
qualification "hindi ko sinacdya patayin." X's
counsel assured the court that he fully apprised X
of the Information, the nature of the charge, and
the consequences of his plea. X even waived the
prosecution's presentation of evidence against
him, The court convicted X of murder.
a) Was the plea of guilty entered valid? Explain.
b)

May the prosecution dispense with the
presentation of evidence despite the waiver of
the accused? Explain. (96 Bar Q13-2)

re hotding that plea barganing is limited solely to pleading guilty to a
lesser offense seems arguable, There is nothing in the Rules of Criminal
Procedure to that effect The 1985 Rules adopted in a footnote the definition in
Blackc'g Law Dictionary that plea bargaining is "[the process whereby the
accused and tne prosecution in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of te case subject to count approval."

473

•

#

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

A.
a) No the plea of guilty entered was not valid. When
the accused makes a conditional plea, a plea of
ot guilty shall be entered for him.
Here the plea of guilty was clearly conditional
since the accused claimed that he did not intend to
kill. Hence a plea of not guilty should have been
entered for him,
Furthermore, when the accused pleads guilty to
a capital offense, the court shall conduct as searching
inquiry into the voluntariness and full comprehension

of the consequences of his plea. Evidently the court
did not conduct such inquiry as it merely relied upon
X's counsel's assurance.

b)

No, the prosecution may not dispense with the
presentation of evidence despite the waiver of the
accused.

Firstly, since there was no valid plea, the court
should have vacated X's plea and required him to
plead anew.
Second, murder is a capital offense since it is
punishable by death, The court shall require the
prosecution to prove his guilt and the precise degree
of culpability."
Q.

When may the accused enter a plea of guilty to a
lesser offense?

A.

At arraignment, the accused, with the consent of the
offended party and the prosecutor, may be allowed by
the trial court to plead guilty
a lesser offense which

to

"Ate ime this question was asked murder was a cap.tat offense sine
lt was punishable with death, Subsequently the death penalty was abolished by
R.A. No. 9346, effective 30 June 2006. Hence murder ls no longer a capital
offense

474

RULE 116
Arraignment and Plea

is necessarily included in the offense charged. (S2
R116) Note that the consent of both the offended
Darty and the prosecutor plus court approval is required.

After arraignment but before trial, the accused
may still be allowed to plead guilty to said lesser
offense after withdrawing his plea of not guilty. No
amendment of the complaint or information is necessary
in either case. (S2 R116), The consent of the offended
party and the prosecutor is required.
One of the matters that shall

be considered

during the pre-trial conference is plea bargaining.

(S1[a] R118). The prosecutor's and the offended party's

consent is needed for any plea-bargaining arrangement
(SC Guidelines on Pretrial and Discovery effective 14
August 2004). In victimless crimes (such as drugs
cases) the consent should be given by the arresting

officer." (Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases)
Q.

Respondent was charged before the RTC of the
crime of Illegal sale of dangerous drugs for
allegedly selling two heat-sealed transparent sachets
containing a total of 0.149 gram of shabu. During
the presentation of the prosecution's evidence,
respondent filed a motion to plea bargain
contending that as per A.M. No. 18-03-16-SC, he
may be allowed to plead guilty to a lesser offense
of possession of drugs paraphernalia, which is
punishable only by imprisonment ranging from 6
months and 1 day to 4 years. The prosecution
opposed the motion, invoking DOJ Circular No.

seems more appropriate that in victimless crimes, the consent should
De given by the complaining law enforcement agont, who may rot necessarily be
the arresting officer. After al, the notice of arraignment and pretrial is sent to him

not to the arresting officer

475

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

27, which provides that for the crime charged, the
acceptable plea bargain is for possession of
dangerous drugs, punishable by imprisonment
ranging from 12 years and 1 day to 20 years.

The RT granted respondent's motion over
the opposition of the prosecution. It opined that
since It is only the Supreme Court that has the
power to promulgate rules of procedure, A.M. No.
18-03-16-SC must prevail over DOJ Circular No.
27. Respondent was re-arraigned, pied guilty to

possession of drugs paraphernalia over the
objection of the prosecution, and was convicted
by the RTC. The People, through the 0G, filed a
petition for certiorari with the CA to set aside the
RTC judgment. The petition was filed out of time
and without a prior motion for reconsideration.
Will the petition prosper?
A.

Yes. A plea bargain requires the prosecutor's consent
pursuant to S2 R116. A.M. No. 18-03-16-SC and
DOJ Circular No, 27 should be read together in that
while it is the SC's prerogative to lay down rules on
plea-bargaining, a plea bargain still requires the
prosecutor's consent. The court cannot compel the
prosecutor to give his consent. A plea bargain made
without the prosecutor's consent Is void.
Hence, the judgment of conviction rendered by
the RTC based on the accused's guilty plea is void.
The procedural infirmities may thus be overlooked
since a void judgment can be attacked at any time.
The SC ordered the remand of the case lo the RTC
for continuation of the trial. (People v. Roafor, 16
November 2020, Perlas-Bernabe, J., see also People
v. Sabater, 14 June 2021, Lazaro-Javier, J).

476

RULE 116
Arraignment and Plea

a.

May the accused plead guilty to a lesser offense
which is not necessarily included in the crime
charged?

A.

Not anymore. Under the 1985 Rules the accused may
plead guilty to a lesser offense regardless of whether
or not it was necessarily included in the crime

charged. However, Section 4 of Circular 38-98
restored the requirement under the 1964 Rules that
the lesser offense should be necessarily included in
the offense charge.

0.

May the accused plead guilty to a lesser offense
which is cognizable by a court of lesser jurisdiction
than the trial court?

A.

Yes. The lack of jurisdiction is only apparent because
once a court acquires jurisdiction by virtue of the
allegations of the complaint or information it retains
the same until the final disposition of the case. (JOSE
Y, FERIA, 1985 RULES ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

33 [1985))
Q.

What is a capital offense?

A.

A capital offense is an offense which, under the law
existing at the time of its commission and of the
arraignment, may be punished with death. (See S6
R114)

Q.

What should the court do when the accused
pleads guilty to a capital offense?

A.

The court shall conduct a searching inquiry into the
voluntariness and full comprehension (SVC) of the
consequences of his plea and shall require the
prosecution to prove his guilt and the precise degree
of culpability (PGD). (S3 R116)

477

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

When the accused pleads guilty to a capital offense,
may he still present evidence in his behalf?

A.

Yes for the purpose of fixing the precise degree of his

culpability. (S3 R116). However if the evidence
presented by the accused is exculpatory, his plea
shall be deemed withdrawn and a plea of not guilty
shall be entered for him. (S1[d] R116)

a.

What may the court do when the accused pleads
guilty to a non-capital offense?

A.

The court may receive evidence from the parties to
determine the penalty to_be imposed (S4 R116).°°
Note that the reception of evidence is discretionary unlike
in the case of a plea of guilty to a capital offense

Q.

Charged with the crime of murder before the
Regional Trial Court of Bulacan, the accused,
assisted by counsel, pleaded guilty to the charge.
Thereupon, the trial court rendered a judgment
convicting the accused for the crime of murder
and sentencing him to suffer reclusion perpetua
and to pay civil indemnity to the heirs of the
victim. Did the trial court act property? Why? (93
Bar 02)

A.

The trial court acted properly. The duty of the court to
conduct a searching inquiry into the voluntariness and
full comprehension of the consequences of the
accused's plea and to require the prosecution to
prove his guilt and the precise degree of culpability
applies only to a capital offense. (People v. Madraga,
eb, 15 November 2000, Buena, J.). Since the death

re

Revised Guidelines on Contiuous Tnal of Cnminat Cases provide
that "[if the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged in the information,
Judgment shall be immediately rendered except in those cases involving capital
punishment" Apparently der the revised guiebnes, the count should no +onger
calve evidence but procoed forthwith to render judgment t is opined that the
court' s discretion to receive evidence should still be retained

478

RULE 116

Arraignment and Plea

penalty has been abolished by the 1987 Constitution
(effective 2 February 1987), there is no longer any
capital offense.
Q.

An information was filed in the RTC charging the
accused with murder committed in 2008. Under
the Revised Penal Code, any person found guilty
of murder shall be punished by reclusion perpetua to
death. Upon his arraignment in 2009, the accused
pleaded guilty to the crime charged, The trial
court, applying S3 R116, scheduled four hearing
dates for the prosecution to present its witnesses
to prove the accused's guilt and degree of
culpability. The prosecution however failed to
present any witness. Nonetheless, the RTC found
the accused guilty beyond reasonable doubt
based on his guilty plea and sentenced him
to reclusion perpetua. The trial court stated that
the accused maintained his plea despite being
apprised that he will be sentenced and imprisoned
on the basis thereof.
The accused appealed to the Court of
Appeals arguing that the trial court erred in
convicting him of the crime charged on the basis
solely of the his guilty plea and despite the
prosecution's failure to prove his guilt beyond
reasonable doubt. The CA rendered a decision
setting aside the accused's conviction because of
the RTC's failure to observe the mandate of S3
Rit6, especially the duty to require the prosecution
to prove the accused's guilt. The CA remanded
the case to the RTC with the directive that it follow
the mandate of S3 R116.

" Upan the affoctivity of the 1987 Constitution on 2 February 1987. the
death perally was abolished, This was the situation gt the time the bar question
was asked, The deatn penaty was reimposed by FR.A. No. 7659 which too
effect on 31 December 1993. The death penalty was abolished again by R.A
N. 9346 which took effect on 30 Jure 2006.

479

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

The accused appealed to the Supreme Court
and argued that the CA should not have remanded
the case but should have instead acquitted him
for the prosecution's failure to prove his guilt
beyond reasonable doubt. ls the accused's
argument meritorious?
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court stated that murder remains
a capital offense despite the prohibition on the imposition
of the death penalty. The Court, citing People v.
Albert, 251 SCRA 136 (1995), said that in case death
was found to be the Imposable penalty, the same
would only have to be reduced to reclusion perpetua in
view of the prohibition against the imposition of the
capital punishment, but the nature of the offense of
murder as a capital crime, and for that matter, of all
crimes properly characterized as capital offenses
under the Revised Penal Code, was never tempered
to that of a non-capital offense."
The Court held that a remand was not proper
since the prosecution was given adequate opportunity
to present evidence of the accused's guilt but failed to
do so, Hence the accused was entitled to an acquittal
because of the failure of the prosecution to prove his
guilt beyond reasonable doubt. (People v. Pagal, G.R.
No. 241257, e.b, 29 September 2020).°

e Psgal holding deserves an earnest re-examination. My view is tat
there is presently no capital offense because R.A. No. 9346 abolished the death
penalty Said law provides clearly that the provisions of R A. No. 7859, FR A. No.
877,and all other laws insofar as they impose the death penalty are hereby
repealed or amended accordingly. Hence 83 R116 was inapplicable and the
accused was properly sentenced by the trial count to reclusion perpetua in
accordance with S4 Rt18 governing a plea of guilty to a non-capital offense

480

RULE 116

Arraignment and Plea

Q.

May a plea of guilty be withdrawn and be
substituted by a plea of not guilty?

A.

Yes if the plea of guilt was im:rovident and provided
the judgment of conviction has not yet become final.
(S5 R116), The withdrawal shall be made with the
permission of the court. The court has the discretion
to permit the withdrawal or not

Q.

What are the grounds for the suspension of the
arraignment?

A.

Upon motion by the proper party, the arraignment
shall be suspended in the following cases: (PUP)

(a) The accused appears to be suffering from an
unsound mental condition which effectively
renders him unable to fully understand the charge
against him and to plead intelligently thereto. In
such case, the court shall order his mental
examination and, if necessary, his confinement
for such purpose.
(b) There exists a prejudicial question
(c)

A petition for review of the resolution of the
prosecutor is pending at either the Department of
Justice, or the Office of the President; provided,
that the period of suspension shall not exceed 60
days counted from the filing of the petition with
the reviewing office.

Q.

ls the 60-day period for suspension of arraignment in
S11(c) R116, directory or mandatory?

A

It is mandatory. Upon the lapse of the 60-day period,
the court is duty-bound to arraign the accused or deny
a motion to defer arraignment, whether or not the
petition before the DOJ has been resolved. (People v.
Goyala, 15 July 2020, Gesmundo, 4.)
481

RULE 117. MOTION TO QUASH
0,

What is the period within which a motion to quash
may be flled?

A.

At any time before entering his plea, the accused may
move to quash the complaint or information,

Q.

What are the form and contents of a motion to
quash?

A,

The motion to quash shall be in writing, signed by the
accused or his counsel and shall distinctly specify its
factual and legal grounds. (S2 R117).

Q.

May a court consider a ground other than those
stated in the motion to quash?

A.

No. The court shall consider no ground other than
those stated in the motion to quash, except lack of
jurisdiction over the offense charged, (S2 R117).

Q.

May an oral motion to quash be considered by
the court?

A.

As a general rule, no, S2 R117 states that a motion
to quash shall be in writing, signed by the accused or
his counsel and shall distinctly specify its factual and
legal grounds However, an oral motion to quash may
be considered by the court if the ground is lack of
jurisdiction over the offense charged and such lack of
jurisdiction is apparent from the evidence on record.
($2 R117; see S1 R9), In fact, a criminal court may
consider motu proprio lack of jurisdiction over the
offense charged at any stage of the proceedings.
(Treas v. People, 25 January 2012).

482

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

0.

An information for the crime of estafa nder
Article 316(2) of the Revised Penal Code (disposing
of real property as free from encumbrance) was

filed against the accused, The information alleged
as follows:

"That on 29 Feb 2012, in Manila, the accused
did willfully defraud MILDRED BANGIT by conveying
a parcel of land xxx in favor of Margarito Pacia for
P800,000 pursuant to a Deed of Absolute Sale
which was duly registered xxx said accused knowing
that they had earlier encumbered the property by
way of another (notarized] deed of sale in favor of

Mildred Bangit for P800,000 xx to the damage of
Mildred Bang it in the amount of P800,000."
The accused were convicted by the MTC and

their conviction was affirmed by the RTC. On
appeal to the CA, the accused raised for the first
time the ground that the information failed to
charge an offense considering that it did not
allege that there was express representation by
the accused that the real property was free from
encumbrance. The prosecution countered that
this defect in the information was a mere formal
one which was waived by the accused when they
did not raise it in a motion to quash. ls the
prosecution correct?
A.

No. The ground that the information failed to charge
an offense is not waived even if not raised in a motion
to quash pursuant to $9 R117; hence, such ground
may be raised even on appeal or considered by the
court motu proprio. Here, the information did not
allege an element of estafa under Article 316(2), that
is, that accused made an express representation In
the second deed of sale with Pacia that the land is

483

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

free from any encumbrance. The accused should be
acquitted on the ground that the Information failed to
charge an offense. (Tayamen v. People, 28 April
2021, Delos Santos, J.).
Q.

What are the grounds of a motion to quash?

A.

The grounds of a motion to quash are the following:
(JEJEMON FD)

(a) The facts charged do not constitute an offense.
(b) The court trying the case has no jurisdiction over
the offense charged.
(c) The court trying the case has no jurisdiction over
the person of the accused.
(d) The pfficer who filed the information had no
authority to do so.
(e)

The complaint or Information does not conform
substantially to the prescribed form

(f) More than one offense is charged except when a

single punishment for various offenses is prescribed
by law. (Multiplicitous complaint/information)

(g)

The criminal
extinguished

action

or

liability

has

been

(h) The complaint or information contains averments
which, If true, would constitute a legal excuse or
justification.

(i)

The accused has previously been convicted or
acquitted of the offense charged, or the case
against him was terminated without his express
consent. (Double jeopardy).

484

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Q.

Distinguish a motion to quash from a demurrer to

evidence.
A.

A motion to quash is distinguished from a demurrer to
evidence (S23 R119) as follows:
AS FOR TIME TO FILE. A motion to quash

should be filed before plea while a demurrer to evidence
is filed after the prosecution has rested its case.

AS FOR GROUND/S. A motion to quash may be
filed on any of the grounds specified In S3 R117 while
a demurrer to evidence is grounded on insufficiency
of evidence alone.
AS FOR LEAVE OF COURT. Leave of court is
not required of a motion to quash while leave of court
is necessary if the accused wants to retain the right to
present evidence in case of the demurrer's denial.
Q.

If the motion to quash is sustained, should the
accused under custody be discharged?

A.

It depends.
If the court orders that another complaint or
information be filed, the accused, if in custody, shall
not be discharged unless admitted to bail. The court
however may not order the filing of another complaint
or information where the quashal was based on
extinction of the criminal action/liability or on double
jeopardy. (ED).

f no order to file another complaint or information is
made or if having been made, no new complaint or
information is filed within the time specified in the
order or within such further time as the court may allow
for good cause, the accused, if in custody, shall be
discharged unless he is also in custody for another cause.

485

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Is the order sustaining the motion to quash a bar
to another prosecution for the same offense?

A,

No. An order sustaining the motion to quash is not a
bar to another prosecution for the same offense. The
exceptions are if the motion to quash is grounded on
extinction of the criminal action or liability or on double
jeopardy.

Q.

(ED).

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituin who
has been charged under RA 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act) before the Sandiganbayan.
While Angela has posted bail, she has yet to be
arraigned. Angela revealed to you that she has
not been Investigated for any offense and that it
was only when police officers showed up at her
residence with a warrant of arrest that she learned
of the pending case against her, She wonders why
she has been charged before the Sandiganbayan
when she is not in government service,
a) What "before-trial" remedy would you invoke
in Angela's behalf to address the fact that she
had not been investigated at all, and how
would you avail of this remedy?
b) xxx (13 Bar 07)

A.

a) The "before-trial" remedy I would invoke in
Angela's behalf is to file a motion to remand the case
to the investigating prosecutor for preliminary investigation.
I cannot file a motion to quash the information since
absence of a preliminary investigation is not a ground
of a motion to quash nor will it justify petitioner's
release because such defect did not nullify the
information and the warrant of arrest against her.
Furthermore, the filing of charges and the issuance of
the warrant of arrest against a person invalidly
detained will cure the defect of that detention or at

486

RULE 117

Motion to Quash
least deny her the right to be released because of
such defect. (Larranaga v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No.
130644, 13 March 1998)
The motion to remand the case should be
availed of before Angela enters her plea. The fact that
Angela had posted ball shall not bar her from
assailing the regularity or questioning the absence of
a preliminary investigation, provided that she raises
them before entering her plea. (S26 R114),
Court trying the case has no jurisdiction over the

offense charged
Q.

'

Macario Tolosa was accosted by the police while
walking along Rizal St., Malolos, Bulacan, carrying a
television set. Unable to give a satisfactory
explanation as to the ownership of the TV set,
Tolosa was brought to the police precinct for further
investigation. During the interrogation, Tolosa
broke down and confessed that he is a member of
the BABA Gang; that the gang is engaged in
robbing houses in Bulacan and other places; and
that the TV set he was carrying was his share of
the loot that week. Based on this confession and
the results of a preliminary investigation, the Provincial
Fiscal of Bulacan flied a criminal Information for
robbery against Tolosa with the Regional Trial
Court of Bulacan,
In the course of the trial, the prosecution
presented as witness, Minda Casem with address
at 1970-D, Recto Avenue, Calamba, Laguna.
Casem testified that the TV set belonged to her
and proved her ownership by her hand-written
markings inside the TV set. When cross-examined
by Atty. Rafael Cortez, counsel de oficio of the
accused, Casem testified that:
487

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

"ATTY. CORTEZ:
Q You said that you own this TV set marked as
Exhibit "A." Where did you keep this TV set?

A

In my apartment, sir.

Q And where Is your apartment located?

A

1970.D, Recto Avenue, Calamba, Laguna, sir.

Q And where was this TV set stolen?

A Of course, in the same address!"
Thereafter Atty. Rafael Cortez terminated his
cross-examination and the witness was excused
from the witness stand. Before the prosecution
could call its next witness, Atty. Cortez orally moved
for the quashal of the information for robbery.
Was the motion to quash proper? Why? (83
Bar 011).

A.

Yes, the motion to quash was proper.

The Supreme Court has held that venue is
jurisdictional in criminal cases. Here the testimony of
Ms. Casem showed that the venue
the robbery was
in Calamba, Laguna, where the crime was committed.
The fact that the TV set was taken to Malolos, Bulacan,
did not make it a venue since robbery is not a
continuing crime. Not having jurisdiction over the offense
charged, the court must quash the information.

of

That the motion to quash was made after the
arraignment would not make the quashal improper
since lack of jurisdiction over the offense charged
may be raised al any stage. (See S9 R117)

488

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

That the motion to quash was not in writing
would not matter, Lack of jurisdiction over the offense
charged may be considered by the court even if not
raised in a motion to quash. (S2 R117). The Supreme
Court has held that a criminal court may consider
motu proprio lack of jurisdiction over the offense
charged at any stage of the proceedings. (Treas v.
People, 25 January 2012)

Facts charged do not constitute an offense
Q.

What is the test to determine whether the facts
charged in complaint or information constitute
an offense?

A,

The test to determine whether or not the facts
charged in the complaint or information constitute an
offense ls to ask whether the facts alleged, if
hypothetically admitted, would establish the_ essential
glemnents of the crime charged. If the answer is yes,
then the motion to quash should be denied. The truth
of the allegations is not material in determining the
sufficiency of the motion to quash but is something to
be established by the evidence adduced during the
trial. The test focuses solely on the allegations of the
complaint or information and evidence aliunde is not
considered. (Domingo v. Sandiganbayan, 322 SCRA

655 [20001).
Q.

What shall the court do if the motion to quash is
based on the ground that the facts charged do not
constitute an offense?

A.

The court shall give the prosecution an opportunity to
correct the defect by amendment. If the prosecution
fails to make the amendment or the complaint or
information still suffers from the same defect despite
the amendment, the court shall grant the motion to
quash. (S4 R117).

489

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

No jurisdiction over the offense charged
Q.

A,

What are the requisites in order that the court
would have jurisdiction over the offense charged?

The requisites in order that the court would have
jurisaiction over the offense charged are: (JV)
(1) The offense charged is one which the court is by

law conferred to take cognizance of (subjectmatter jurisdiction); and
(2) The offense must have been committed within the

court's territorial jurisdiction (venue). This is
consonant with the principle that venue in criminal
cases is jurisdictional.

No jurisdiction over the accused's person
Q.

How does a court acquire jurisdiction over the

person of the accused?
A,

Jurisdiction over the person of the accused is
acquired either by his lawful arrest or by his voluntary
appearance in court. The voluntary appearance of the
accused may be made by the filing of a pleading or
motion in court. However if the motion to quash was
precisely and exclusively to challenge the jurisdiction
of the court over the accused's person under S3(b)
R117, the accused is not deemed to have made a

voluntary appearance.
Q.

Two days after the killing of Y, the police
accompanied by the eyewitness W arrested X in
his house after he was pointed to by W as the
culprit. Inquest proceedings were held and the
information for homicide was subsequently filed
against X. X is under detention in the city jail and
his arraignment will be held 3 days later. You had
just been engaged to represent the accused.
490

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

What remedles will you avall of in order to obtain
the speedy release from detention of X and in
order to dismiss the criminal case against him?
A.

In order to obtain the speedy release of XI Will file an
application for bail with the trial court. X is entitled to
bail as a matter of right since homicide is not
punishable by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment.
In order to dismiss the criminal case against X, I
would file a motion to quash the information on the
ground that the court did not acquire jurisdiction over
the person of the accused. Jurisdiction over the
person of the accused is obtained either by his lawful
arrest or his voluntary appearance in court. Here there
was an unlawful warrantless arrest since the same
took place 2 days after the commission of the crime
The application for bail does not result in the waiver of
objections to the illegality of the arrest, (S26 R114).

Q.

The accused filed a motion to quash the
information on the grounds that the court had no
jurisdiction over his person, that the court had no
jurisdiction over the offense charged, and that the
officer who filed the information had no authority
to do so. ls the accused deemed to have waived
the objection to lack of personal jurisdiction?

A.

Yes. The rule is that if the accused objects to the
jurisdiction of the court over his person, he may move
to quash the information, but only on that ground. If,
as in this case, the accused raises other grounds in
the motion to quash, he is deemed to have waived
that objection and to have submitted his person to the
jurisdiction of that court. (Larranaga v. Court of
Appeals, 287 SCRA 581 [1998]; Sanchez v. Demetriou,

227 SCRA 627 (19931."
"y e submitted that this doctrine should be te-examined. The accused
who has valid grounds to quash aside from lack of personal jurisdiction would be

491

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Officer who filed the information had no authority to
doso
Q.

The prosecutor filed an information charging the
accused with seduction. No complaint was filed
by the private offended party. What is the ground
of the motion to quash?

A.

The ground of the motion to quash is lack of
jurisdiction over the offense charged and not lack of
authority of the prosecutor to file the information. The
reason is that in crimes which cannot be prosecuted
de oficio, the complaint of the private offended party is
jurisdictional. (People v. Duran, 107 Phil. 979). Hence

this ground is not waived even if not raised before plea.
Q.

The accused was arrested without warrant after
an entrapment operation, After the inquest, an
information for corruption of public officials was
filed with the RTC of Makati City against the
accused. The information was signed by the assistant
city prosecutor (ACP) of Makati City and contained
his certification that it was filed with the prior
authority of the city prosecutor, After trial on the
merits and submission of the case for decision,
the RTC motu proprio issued an order dismissing
the case for lack of jurisdiction. The RTC stated
that it did not acquire jurisdiction over the case
since the information was filed without the prior
written authority of the city prosecutor. The
prosecution filed a motion for reconsideration

confronted with a dllemma If he includes the other grounds aside from lack of
personal jurisdiction, he is deemed to have waived the ground of lack of personal
Jurisdiction On the other hand If he des not include them, he is deemed to have
waived these other grounds. (S9 R117), If seems anomalous that a defendant in
a civil case would have a better right than an accused in a criminal case. (See
$20 R14)

492

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

arguing that the lack of authority was waived by
the accused when he failed to raise this in a
motion to quash. The RTC denied the motion. The
prosecution then filed a special clvil action for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals to set aside
the RTC's dismissal. Will the petition for certiorari
prosper?

A.

Yes. The ACP's lack of authority to file the information
did not implicate the trial court's subject matter or
personal jurisdiction. Lack of prior written authority or
approval by the prosecuting officers authorized to
approve and sign the same has nothing to do with a
trial court's acquisition of jurisdiction in a criminal
case. Not being jurisdictional, such ground was waived
by the accused if not raised in a motion to quash
pursuant to S9 R117. (Villa Gomez v. People, e.b., 10
November 2020, Gesmundo, J.). The Court overturned
the doctrine in Quisay v. People, 13 January 2016,
and similar cases holding that such lack of authority is
jurisdictional.

Q.

ls the ground that the information was filed
without the prior written authority of the city
prosecutor waived by the failure to assert this in a
motion to quash?

A.

Yes. (S9 R117; Ongkingco v. Sugiyama, 18 September

2019, Peralta, J).
Q.

Pedrito and Tomas, Mayor and Treasurer, respectively,
of the Municipality of San Miguel, Leyte, are
charged before the Sandiganbayan for violation of
Section 3(e), Republic Act No. 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act). The information alleges,
among others, that the two conspired in the purchase
of several units of computer through personal
canvass instead of a public bidding, causing undue
injury to the municipality.
493

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Before arraignment, the accused moved for

reinvestigation of the charge, which the court
granted, After reinvestigation, the Office of the

Special Prosecutor filed an amended informatior
duly signed and approved by the Special Prosecutor,
alleging the same delictual facts, but with an additional
allegation that the accused gave unwarranted
benefits to SB Enterprises owned by Samuel. Samuel
was also Indicted under the amended information.

Before Samuel was arraigned, he moved to
quash the amended information on the ground
that the officer who filed the same had no authority
to do so. Resolve the motion to quash with
reasons. (09 Bar Q4)
A,

The motion to quash should be granted.
Under S4 R112, no complaint or information may
be filed by an investigating prosecutor without the
prior written authority or approval of the provincial or
city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the
Ombudsman or his deputy.
The Special Prosecutor is not mentioned among
those authorized to approve the filing of complaints or
information. Hence the O#ficos of the Special Prosecutor
had no authority to file the information and the motion
to quash should be granted. (Perez v. Sandiganbayan,
GR. No. 166062, 26 September 2006)

Q.

Charged with the offense of slight physical
injuries under an information duly filed with the
MeTC in Manila which in the meantime had duly
issued an order declaring that the case shall be
governed by the Revised Rule on Summary Procedure,
the accused filed with said court a motion to
quash on the sole ground that the officer who

494

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

4

filed the Information had no authority to do so.
The MeTC denied the motion on the ground that it
is a prohibited motion under the said Rule. Was
the MeTC's ruling correct? (Based on 04 Bar Qb).

A.

The MeTC's ruling was not correct. The Supreme
Court has held that an information filed by a qualified
and authorized officer is required for the iurisdiction of

the court over the case.

Hence the motion to quash filed by the accused
was in effect based on lack of jurisdiction over the
offense. It is thus an exception to the rule that a
motion to quash ls a prohibited motion under the Rule
on Summary Procedure.

Duplicitous/multiplicitous complaint or information
Q.

Rodolfo is charged with possession of unlicensed
firearms In an Information filed in the Regional
Trial Court. It was alleged therein that Rodolfo
was in possession of two unlicensed firearms: a
.45 caliber and a .32 caliber.

Under Republic Act No. 8294, possession of
an unlicensed .45 caliber gun is punishable by
prision mayor in its minimum period and a fine of
P30,000, while possession of an unlicensed .32
caliber gun is punishable by prision correccional
In its maximum period and a fine of not less than

P15,000.
As counsel for the accused, you intend to file
a motion to quash the information. What ground
or grounds should you invoke? Explain. (05 Bar

013)

495

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

The grounds of the motion to quash which I should
invoke are: (1) the information is duplicitous, that is, it
charges more than one offense; and (2) the court has
no jurisdiction over the offense charged.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
information may be quashed if it charges more than

one offense.
Here the information charges two offenses: one
possession of an unlicensed .45 caliber gun and

another, possession of an unlicensed .32 caliber gun.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, an
information may be quashed on the ground that the
court has no jurisdiction over the offense charged.
Under the Law on Jurisdiction, the MTC has
original and exclusive jurisdiction over offenses
punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six years.
Here the penalty for the possession of an unlicensed
.32 caliber gun is punishable by prision correccional in
its maximum period or six years. Hence the prescribed
penalty does not exceed six years and thus the
Regional Trial Court has no jurisdiction.

•

Accused was charged before the RTC under an
Information which averred as follows:
That on or about June 8, 2014, at around
11:00 a.m., in Barangay xxx Municipality of xxx,
Province of Misamis Oriental, Philippines, and
within the jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the
accused with lewd design and by using force and
intimidation, did then and there willfully and feloniously
have carnal knowledge with [AAA], minor, 7 years
old, by inserting his finger in her vagina against
her consent, to her damage and prejudice.

496

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

.. Contrary to and in violatlon of Article 266-A
and 266-B of the Revised Penal Code."
The accused was convicted of statutory rape
by the RTC. On appeal, the CA rendered Judgment

finding the accused guilty not only of statutory
rape but also of rape by sexual assault. Was the
CA's conviction proper?
A.

Yes. S13 R110 provides that an information must only
charge one offense, except only in those cases in
which existing laws prescribe a single punishment for
various offenses. The remedy of the accused is to
move to quash the information before entering his
plea. If the accused fails to move to quash the
duplicitous information, it would be considered as a
waiver. Thus, the court could convict the accused on
all the charges alleged in the information,
Here, the information charged two offenses
(statutory rape and rape by sexual assault) but the
defect was waived by the accused's failure to file a
motion to quash. Hence, the accused could be convicted
of both statutory rape and rape by sexual assault.
The information sufficiently alleged the crime of
rape by sexual assault. The use of the word "by" is
misplaced, since the information started with carnal
knowledge, the term refers to penile penetration. The
intention of the prosecution is to use "thereafter,"
instead of "by," to connote two different counts of rape
that was committed on the same occasion. If the
accused felt that the information was vague, he
should have filed a motion for a bill of particulars
(People v. XXX, 21 June 2021, Lopez, 4., J.)

497

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Double jeopardy
Q.

What is double jeopardy?

A.

Double jeopardy refers to the situation wherein the
accused, after having been previously convicted or
ac uitted of an offense or the proceedings against
him terminated without his express consent, is again
charged with the same offense. (S3[)] R117). It is a
ground for a motion to quash.

Q.

State the
jeopardy.

A.

No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment
for the same offense. If an act is punished by a law
and an ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either

constitutional

provision

on

double

shall constitute a bar to another prosecution for the
same act. (Sec. 21, Art. Ill. Constitution).
Q.

What are the requisites of double jeopardy?

A,

The requisites of douole jeopardy are the following:
(C JIPS)

(a) The accused had been convicted or acquitted or
the case against him terminated without his
express consent;
(b) By a court of competent jurisdiction;
(c) Upon a valid complaint or information sufficient in
form and substance to sustain a conviction;

(d) After the accused had pleaded to the charge; and
(e) The second prosecution is for the offense charged
in tne former complaint or information, or for any
gttempt to commit the same or frustration thereof,

498

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

or for any offense which necessarily includes

or is necessarily included in the offense charged
in the former complaint or information (FAN).
(Same offense) (S7 R117)

Conviction, acquittal, or termination without express

consent
Q.

An accused was discharged to be a state witness
against his co-accused in a case of murder. May
the accused be prosecuted later on for the same
crime of murder?

A.

No. The discharge of the accused to be a state
witness operates as an acquittal of the discharged
accused and shall be a bar to future prosecution for
the same offense, unless the accused fails or refuses
to testify against his co-accused in accordance with
his sworn statement constituting the basis for his
discharge. (S18 R119)

a.

When would double jeopardy apply even if the
termination of the case was with the express consent
of the accused? (DS)

A.

(1) Dismissal of the case upon a demurrer to
evidence ($23 R119; People v. City of Silay, G.R.
No. L-43790, 9 December 1976)
(2) Dismissal based on the denial of the accused's
right to a speedy trial (S9 R119; People v. Pablo,

98 SCRA 289).

499

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

X was charged with the violation of B.P. Bl. 22
for issuing a check which was dishonored because
X's bank account had already been closed even
before the date of the check. X pleaded not guilty.
After trial, the judge promulgated a decision
dismissing the case on the ground that the
information was fatally defective since it did not
allege that X had knowledge that he would have
no sufficient funds to fully pay for the check upon
its presentment.

(a) Was the decision of the trial judge correct?
(b) May the prosecution appeal from the judgment
of acquittal?
A.

(a)

The decision of the trial judge was erroneous.

It is not necessary for the information to allege
that X had knowledge that he would have no sufficient
funds to fully pay for the check upon Its presentment
because such knowledge by the accused is already
presumed if the check is dishonored when presented
within 90 days from date thereof. (Sec. 2, BP. Blg. 22)
(b) No the prosecution may not challenge the decision
by a petition for certiorari. Although the decision
was erroneous, that decision may not be annulled
or set aside because it amounted to a judgment
of acquittal. It became final and executory upon
its promulgation. The State may not appeal that
decision for it would place the accused twice in
jeopardy of punishment for the offense in violation
of his constitutional right against double jeopardy
(Art. III, Sec. 21, 1987 Constitution).

500

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Since X had been arraigned, pleaded "not guilty,"
and was tried upon a valid and sufficient information
(although the lower court erroneously thought
otherwise) and the case against him was dismissed
by decision of the trial court (hence, without his
consent and not upon his motion), he has been
placed in jeopardy or danger of punishment for the
offense charged. To re-assess the evidence against
him pursuant to the Government's appeal, would
place him twice in jeopardy of punishment for the
same offense. (People v. Laggui, G.R. No.76262-63,
16 March 1989).
Q.

May the prosecution appeal a Court of Appeals
judgment which reduced the accused's conviction
for attempted rape to one for lascivious acts?

A.

No. Since the Court of Appeals (CA) modified the
accused's conviction from attempted rape to acts of
lasciviousness, the CA in effect had already acquitted
hlm of attempted rape. A review of the downgrading
of the crime will violate the accused's right against
double jeopardy. (People v. Arcega, 27 August 2020,
Peralta, CJ.)

Q.

X committed falsification of public document as a
necessary means to commit estafa. An information
for estafa was flied against X to which he pleaded
not gullty, Subsequently while the first case was
pending, another information for falsification of
public document was filed against X. X moved to
quash the second case on the ground of double
jeopardy, arguing that there was complex crime
and to charge him later of a component crime thereof
would be to charge her of the same offense.

(a)

Should the motion to quash on the ground of
double jeopardy be granted?

501

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME I

(b) If not, may a motion to quash on another
ground prosper?
A.

(a) The motion to quash should be denied.

In order for double jeopardy to arise, the first
charge against the accused must have resulted in a
conviction, acquittal, or a termination without his
express consent.
Here the first case is still pending. Hence double
jeopardy may not be invoked. (People v. Pineda, 219
SCRA 1, G.R. No. 44205, 16 February 1993, e.b.).°
(b)

Yes a motion to quash on the ground that the
court has no jurisdiction to try the offense would
prosper

The Supreme Court has held that once jurisdiction
is acquired by the court in which the information is
filed, it is there retained. Therefore, as the offense of
falsification was included in the charge for estafa pending
before the first court (since there was actually a
complex crime of estafa through falsification of public
document), the second court clearly had no jurisdiction
over the criminal case filed before it, the first court
having retained jurisdiction over the offense to the
exclusion of all other courts. (See Heirs of Honrales
v. Honrales. G.R. No, 182651, 25 August 2010), This
may be called the doctrine of exclusionary jurisdiction.
Q.

Respondent was allegedly refilling, without authority,
Petron Gasul LPG cylinders in his plant in Trece
Martires, Cavite, and selling them there. Afterwards,
a truck brought the LPG cylinders to respondent's
warehouse in Makati City where they were also
sold. Pursuant thereto, an information for violation of

A gorous dissent was penred by Justice Florenz D, Regalado
Nonetheless the Pineda ruling rs stilt tre ruling case law.

502

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Section 168 in relation to Section 170 of the
Intellectual Property Code or for Unfair
Competition was filed against respondent with the
RTC of Trece Martires City. Subsequently, another
information for unfair competition was also filed
against respondent with the Makati RTC. Respondent
moved to quash the Makati RTC case on the

ground of lack of jurisdiction. Should the motion
be granted?

A,

Yes. The crime of unfair competition is a continuing or
transitory crime. In transitory or continuing offenses
in which some acts material and essential to the crime
and requisite to its consummation occur in one place

and some in another, the court of either place has
jurisdiction to try the case. Here, both the RTC of

Trece Martires and of Makati City have jurisdiction to
try the case for unfair competition filed against respondent.
However, it has been held that in cases of concurrent
jurisdiction, the court first acquiring jurisdiction
excludes the other courts. Since it is the RTC of Trece
Martires City which had earlier acquired jurisdiction
over the case of unfair competition filed against
respondent, the RTC of Makati City correctly quashed
the information filed with it for lack of jurisdiction.
The Petron gasul tanks were allegedly refiled by
respondent at his Tree Martires City refilling plant
and were sold therein, Thus, the crime of unfair
competition was already consummated in Trece
Martires City. However, respondent continued to pass
off the Petron gasul tanks as his own by subsequently
selling the same in Makati City. Hence, there is a
continuing violation of the law. Therefore, the sales
made In Cavite and Makati City cannot be considered
as separate offenses of unfair competition as they
merely constitute the ingredients of the crime. (Petron
Corp. v. Yao, 18 March 2021, Peralta, C.J.)

503

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is a nolle prosequi?

A.

A nolle prosecui is the voluntary dismissal or withdrawal
of a criminal information by the prosecution.
It
requires court approval. (See Galvez v. Court of
Appeals, 237 SCRA 685 (19941).

Q.

When a criminal case is dismissed on nolle
prosequi, can it later be refiled? (03 Bar Q15).

A.

It depends. If the accused had not yet been arraigned,
the criminal case can later be refiled as the accused
would not be placed in double jeopardy. It is a general
rule that a nolle prosequi or dismissal entered before
the accused is placed on trial and before he is called
on to plead is not equivalent to an acquittal, and does

not bar a subsequent prosecution for the same
offense. It is not a final disposition of the case. Rather, it
partakes of the nature of a nonsuit or discontinuance
in a civil suit and leaves the matter in the same
condition in which it was before the commencement
of the prosecution. (Galvez vs. Court of Appeals, 237
SCRA 685 [19941).
If the accused had already been arraigned, the
criminal case cannot later be refiled as it would place
the accused in double jeopardy, unless the accused
expressly consented to the dismissal or withdrawal of
the information.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
accused would be placed in double jeopardy if the
criminal case for the same offense had been dismissed
or terminated without his express consent.

504

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Court of competent jurisdiction
0.

Respondent Jonathan Honrales was charged with
parricide before the RTC of Marila for the fatal
shooting of his wife Jane. Respondent filed a
motion for reconsideration of the prosecutor's
resolution finding probable cause for parricide.
The city prosecutor granted the motion and directed
the withdrawal of the information for parricide and
the filing of an information for reckless imprudence
resulting in parricide. The prosecutor thus filed
with the RTC a motion to withdraw the information
for parricide.
While this motion to withdraw was pending
with the RTC, an information for reckless
imprudence resulting in parricide was filed against
the Respondent with the MeTC. Meanwhile the
appeal of Petitioners (Jane's heirs) to the DOJ
from the city prosecutor's resolution withdrawing
the information was denied. At the arraignment
before the MeTC, Respondent pleaded guilty and
was sentenced to imprisonment of one year, 7
months and 11 days to 2 years, 10 months, and 20
days. Later, the RTC Issued an order granting the
motion to withdraw the information relying upon
the DOJ resolution. The Petitioners' motion for
reconsideration was denied.
The Petitioners then filed a petition for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals challenging
the RTC's order granting the motion to withdraw
information. The CA dismissed the petition for
certiorari. Though it found that the RTC judge had
failed to make an independent assessment of the
merits of the case and thus abdicated his judicial
power and acted as a mere surrogate of the

505

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

Secretary of Justice, it ruled that the remand of
the case to the RTC would violate Respondent's
right against double jeopardy. Would the remand
of the case to the RTC violate the Respondent's
right to double jeopardy?

A.

No. In this case, the MeTC took cognizance of the
information for reckless imprudence resulting in
parricide while the criminal case for parricide was still
pending before the RTC. Once jurisdiction is acquired
by the court in which the Information is filed, it is there

retained. Therefore, as the offense of reckless imprudence
resulting in parricide was included in the charge for
intentional parricide pending before the RTC, the
MeTC clearly had no jurisdiction over the criminal
case fled before it, the RTC having retained
jurisdiction over the offense to the exclusion of all
other counts. The requisite of double jeopardy that
the Judgment is rendered by a court of competent
jurisdiction is absent. Hence the remand of the case
to the RTC for trial would not amount to double
Jeopardy. (Heirs of Honrales v. Honrales, G.R. No.
182651, 25 August 2010).
Q.

Wife filed a complaint for bigamy against husband
and Ms. X. The information for bigamy was filed
against the husband and Ms. X (petitioners), The
appearance of private prosecutor for the wife was
denied by the Regional Trial Court. The wife filed a
petition for certiorari with prayer for TRO/preliminary
injunction with the Court of Appeals, which
Issued the TRO. Despite the TRO Issued by the
CA, trial of the bigamy case proceeded with the
presentation of the prosecution's evidence, to
which husband filed a demurrer to evidence, In
an order dated 5 September 2006, the RTC dismissed
the bigamy case for failure of the prosecution to

506

RULE 117

Motion to Quast
prove the petitioners' guilt. In a decision dated 30
July 2010, the CA granted Amelia's petition and
annulled the RTC's 3 March 2006 resolution
disqualifying Atty. Atencia from participation in
the case, and its 5 September 2006 order that
dismissed the bigamy case against the petitioners.
The petitioners contend that the CA's order,
setting aside the RTC's dismissal order, violated
their right against double jeopardy. ls the
petitioners' contention correct?
A.

No. The RTC issued its 5 September 2006 order in
defiance of the TRO issued by the CA. The records
show that the CA had issued a TRO on April 19,
2006, which should have prohibited the RTC from
further proceeding on the case. But the RTC, instead,
continued with the presentation of the prosecution's
evidence and issued the assailed 5 September 2006
order. Under this circumstance, the RTC's 5 September
2006 dismissal order was actually without force and
effect and would not serve as basis for the petitioners
to claim that their right against double jeopardy had
been violated. The RTC acted with grave abuse of
discretion in issuing its 5 September 2006 order in
view of the earlier TRO issued by the CA. (Villalon v.
Chan, 24 September 2014)

0.

What is the remedy of the People from a judgment
dismissing a criminal case on the ground of
violation of the right to a speedy trial, where the
dismissal was with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction?

A.

The proper remedy is a special civil action for
certiorari under R65. A petition for certiorari under
Rule 65, not appeal, is the remedy to question a verdict
of acquittal whether at the trial court or at the

507

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

appellate level, In our jurisdiction, we adhere to the

finality-of-acquittal doctrine, that is, a judgment of
acquittal is final and unappealable. (People v.
Desembrana & SB, 28 July 2020, Lazaro-Javier, J.).
0.

A, B, C, and D were convicted of murder by the RTC.
Only D personally appeared during the promulgation
of the judgment. Subsequently without surrendering
and explaining the reasons for their absence, A,
B, and C joined D In their joint motion for

reconsideration. The RTC took cognizance of the
joint motion for reconsideration and later issued
an order acquitting A and B and downgrading the
conviction of C and D from murder to homicide.

The People filed a special civil action for certiorari
with the Court of Appeals to annul the order. A, B,
C, and O argued that the petition for certiorari
would place them in double jeopardy. Was thelr
argument correct?

A

A, B, and C's argument was not correct.
Under S6 R120, the accused who fails to appear
without justifiable cause during the promulgation shall
lose the remedies available in the Rules of Court
against the judgment and the court shall order his
arrest. However within 15 days from promulgation of
the judgment, the accused may surrender and file a
motion for leave of court to avail of these remedies.
Here the RTC clearly exceeded its jurisdiction
when it not only failed to cause the arrest of A, B, and
C who were at large but also took cognizance of their
joint motion despite the fact that they did not surrender
and file a motion for leave to avail of remedies.
Hence A, B, and C were not placed in double
jeopardy because the RTC acted without urisdiction
and thus its order was void.

508

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

However D was correct in his argument that the

petition for certiorari would place him in double
jeopardy. He was In custody and present at the
promulgation of the judgment. Hence the RTC never
lost jurisdiction over his person and thus the RTC'S
ruling downgrading his conviction from murder to

homicide stands. (People v. De Grano, G.R. No.
167710,5 June 2009).
Q.

Private respondents filed with the Pasay City
Prosecutor a complaint for violation of Sec. 74 of
the Corporation Code against Petitioners who are
the president and corporate secretary of STRADEC,

a domestic corporation. Private respondents
alleged that Petitioners refused to make available
to them the stock and transfer book of STRADEC.
After preliminary investigation, the criminal complaint

was filed with the Metropolitan Trial Court of
Pasay Clty. On the same date, the petitioners filed
an Urgent Motion for Judicial Determination of
Probable Cause and to Defer the Issuance of
Warrants of Arrest Pending Determination with the
MTC. The MTC denied the motion and subsequent
motion for reconsideration.

Petitioners filed a petition for certiorari under
R65 with the Regional Trial Court of Pasay City,
which was raffled to Branch 154. Petitioners were
arraigned in the MTC case. In an order dated 4
June 2007, the RTC-Branch 154, granted the
petition holding that there was no probable cause
to hold the petitioners for trial. Consequently, it
directed the MTC to dismiss the criminal case
want of probable cause. The private respondents
thereafter sought reconsideration but it was denied
by the RTC-Branch 154. Thus, they brought an
appeal to the SC via a petition for review on
certiorari (docketed as G.RR. No. 180416) raising
509

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

pure questions of law. While G.R. No, 180416 was
pending, the MTC dismissed Criminal Case No.
89724, pursuant to the RTC-Branch 154's Order.
The private respondents thereafter filed a motion
for reconsideration, which the MTC granted. Upon
learning that a petition for certiorari had been filed
before the SC, the MTC Issued an order (order of
Revival) recalling the order of Dismissal and
reinstating the criminal information in Criminal
Case No. 89724. The Petitioners argue that the
order of revival would place them in double jeopardy.
Is the Petitioners' argument correct?

A.

No, Under S7 R117, in order that there will be double
jeopardy, the conviction, acquittal, or termination must
be made by a court of competent jurisdiction. Once

the case has been appealed and given due course by
this Court, the lower court or the court of origin could
no longer take cognizance of the issue under review.
It cannot execute the judgment appealed from
because to do so would constitute encroachment on
the exclusive appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Since
the MTC clearly had no jurisdiction to issue the Order
of Dismissal, there can be no double jeopardy
(Quiambao v. People, 17 September 2014)
Accused had pleaded to the first charge
0.

The accused pleaded guilty to homicide. Allowed

to prove mitigating circumstances, the accused
instead testified that he acted in self-defense. No
plea of not guilty was entered for the accused.
The accused was acquitted based on his testimony.
The prosecution appealed from the judgment.
The accused opposed the appeal on the ground of
double jeopardy. Would the appeal place the
accused in double jeopardy?

510

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

A.

No. When the accused pleads guilty but presents
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be deemed
withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be entered for

him. Here the defendant presented exculpatory
evidence when he testified on self-defense, thus the
effect is that his earlier guilty plea was deemed
withdrawn. Since there was no standing plea, the
appeal by the prosecution would not place the
accused in double jeopardy. (S1(d) R116; People v.
Balisacan, G.R. No. L-26376, 31 August 1966).
Q.

X was charged with two counts of raping his
daughter. Upon arraignment, X pleaded guilty but
bargained for a lesser penalty for each case.
Complainant's mother and the public prosecutor
agreed with the plea bargain. Hence the trial
court rendered judgment sentencing X to ten
years for each count of rape.
(a) Was there a proper plea bargaining?
(b) If not, what should the court have done?
(c) After three months, the cases against X were
revived at the instance of the complainant on
the ground that the penalty imposed was "too
light." X was re-arraigned and he entered a
new plea of guilty. After the required proceedings
for capital offense and convinced of X's
voluntariness in pleading guilty, the trial court
convicted X and sentenced him to death. On
appeal, X contends that the re-arraignment
and trial on the same information violated
his right against double jeopardy. ls X's
contention correct?

A.

(a)No. X's plea is not the plea bargaining contemplated
and allowed by law and the rules of procedure. The
only instance where a plea bargaining is allowed
511

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
under the Rules is when an accused pleads guilty to a
lesser offense pursuant to S2 R116. Here, the

reduction of the penalty is only a consequence of
the plea of guilt to a lesser penalty.
It must be emphasized that X did not plead to a
lesser offense but pleaded guilty lo the rape charges

and only bargained for a lesser penalty. In short he
did not plea bargain but made conditions on the
penalty to be imposed. This is erroneous because by

pleading guilty to the offense charged, accusedappellant should be sentenced to the penalty to which
he pleaded. (People v. Magat, G.R. NO, 130026, 31
May 2000, e.b.)
(b) The court should have vacated X's plea and
entered a plea of not guilty for him.
When the accused refused to plead or makes a
conditional plea, a plea of not guilty shall be entered
for him. (S1[c] R116)
Here X made a conditional plea by admitting his
guilt provided that a certain penalty will be meted
upon him. Hence the court should have entered a
plea of not guilty. (People v. Magat, supra)
(c) No, X's contention is not correct.
The judgment rendered by the trial court which
was based on a void plea bargaining is also void ab
initio and can not be considered to have attained
finality for the simple reason that a void judgment has
no legality from its inception. Thus, since the judgment of
conviction rendered against accused-appellant is void,
double jeopardy will not lie. (People v. Magat, supra).

512

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Same offense
Q.

The Constitution provides that "[n]o person shall
be twice put in jeopardy of punishment for the
same offense." What is the meaning of same
offense in the constitutional provision?

A.

A person is being twice put in jeopardy of punishment
for the same offense when the second prosecution
is for.
(1) the offense charged in the former complaint or
information, or
(2) any attempt to commit the same or frustration

thereof, or:
(3) any offense which necessarily includes or is
necessarily included in the offense charged in the
former complaint or information. (fan) (S7 R117).
Q.

When does an offense subject of the second
prosecution necessarily include the offense charged
In the former complaint or information?

A.

An offense subject of the second prosecution (second
offense) necessarily includes the offense charged in
the former complaint or information (first offense)
when some of the essential elements or ingredients of
the second offense, as alleged in the complaint or
information, constitute the first offense. (See S5 R120).
For instance if the accused had been acquitted of
serious physical injuries, he cannot be charged
thereafter with frustrated homicide arising from the
same assault upon the victim which resulted in the
serious physical injuries

513

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

When is an offense subject of the second
prosecution necessarily included in the offense
charged in the former complaint or information?

A

An offense subject of the second prosecution (second
offense) is necessarily included the offense charged
in the former complaint or information (first offense)
when some of the essentlal ingredients of the second

offense, as alleged in the complaint or information,
form_,art of those constituting the first offense. (See
S5 R120). For instance if the accused had been
acquitted of frustrated homicide, he cannot be charged
thereafter with serious physical injuries arising from
the same assault upon the victim which resulted in the
frustrated homicide charge.

Q,

The accused was convicted of Illegal sale of
opium. Subsequently a charge of illegal possession
of opium involving the same tins of opium sold
was brought against the accused. May the accused
invoke double jeopardy on the ground that he is
being put twice in jeopardy for the same offense?

A.

Yes. The second charge of illegal possession of
opium was absorbed or necessarily included In the
first charge of illegal sale since the same tins of opium
were involved in both prosecutions. (U.S. v. Luk
Chaw, 18 Phil. 513).1

Q.

X was acquitted of illegal fishing through the use
of explosives. Subsequently a charge of illegal
possesslon of explosives involving the same
explosives used in the illegal fishing case was
brought against X. May X invoke double jeopardy?

"gee interesting case of People v. De Jesus, 145 SCRA 521, 13
Noverber 1988, wherein t was held that illegal possession of maarJuana wes

absorbed in Illegal sale of marijuana although the accusod na 32 more sticks
tan the 5 sticks he sold to the poseur-buyer

514

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

A.

Yes, the second charge of llegal possession of
explosives was necessarily included or absorbed in
the first charge since the same explosives were
involved. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 333 [(6 rev. ed.])

Q.

The accused were prosecuted for malicious
mischief under an information charging that
actuated by hate and resentment for complainant
they conspired to remove the banguera and media
agua from the complainant's house. The first

charge was dismissed upon a demurrer filed by
the accused since the prosecution was unable to
prove that the accused were actuated by hate or
resentment when they removed the banguera and
media agua. Subsequently the prosecutor brought
another charge for coercion under an information
alleging that the accused prevented the complainant
from leaving intact his house since they forcibly
removed the banguera and the media agua. The
accused moved to quash the second charge on
the ground of double Jeopardy, The prosecution
countered that the second charge although from
the same act is for a different offense. Was there
double jeopardy?

A.

Yes. It is quite clear, even from a cursory comparison
of the two informations, that the act complained of in
the case for coercion is the same which formed the
basis of the information for malicious mischief. In
straight language, the defendants were first charged
with malicious mischief for having removed and
destroyed the "banguera" and "media agua" of Felix
Verzosa. In straight language too, if the latter was
prevented, as alleged in the information for coercion,
from leaving intact his house, it is because the
defendants had removed therefrom the "banguera"
and "media agua."

515

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

While the rule against double jeopardy prohibits
prosecution for the same offense, It seems elementary
that an accused should be shielded against being
prosecuted for several offenses made out from a
single act. Otherwise, an unlawful act or omission
may give rise to several prosecutions depending upon
the ability of the prosecuting officer to imagine or
concoct as many offenses as can be justified by said
act or omission, by simply adding or subtracting
essential elements. Under the theory of appellant, the
crime of rape may be converted into a crime of
coercion, by merely alleging that by force and
intimidation the accused prevented the offended girl
from remaining a virgin, (People v. Del Carmen, G.R.
No. L-3459, 9 January 1951 ).

0.

X was prosecuted and convicted for the violation
of B.P. Blg. 22 for issuing a bouncing check,
Subsequently a second charge for estafa under
Article 315(2)(d) of the Revised Penal Code involving
the same bouncing check was brought against X.
May X invoke double jeopardy?

A.

No, The second prosecution while arising from the
same act is for a different offense. There are several
differences between 8.P Blg. 22 and Article 315(2)()
of the RPC, one of which is that the violation of B.P.
Blg. 22 is malum prohibitum while that of Article
315(2)(d) is malum in se. (Nierras v. Dacuycuy, 181
SCRA 1 ). The doctrine of absorption may not be
applied since Section 5 of B.P. Blg. 22 expressly
provides that prosecution under B.P. BIg. 22 shall be
without prejudice to any liability for violation of any
provision of the Revised Penal Code. (Anti-absorption
clause).

516

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Q.

Accused was charged with estafa through the
issuance of a bouncing check under Article
315(2(d) of the Revised Penal Code. The evidence
failed to prove that there was fraud in the
issuance of the check and thus the accused could
not be held liable for estafa. May the accused be
instead convicted of the violation of B.P, Blg. 22?

A

No. Accused cannot be convicted of a crime for
which she was not properly charged, for that would
violate appellants constitutional right to be informed of
the accusation against her. The violation of BP 22 is
not necessarily included in the crime of estafa under
Article 315, 2(d). The offense of fraud defined under
the Revised Penal Code is malum in se, whereas BP
22 is a special law which punishes the issuance of
bouncing checks, a malum prohibitum. Fraud or estafa
under the Revised Penal Code is a distinct offense
from the violation of the Bouncing Checks Law. They
are different offenses, having different elements. In
this case, since accused is accused of violating a
particular provision of the Revised Penal Code on
estafa, she may not be convicted for violation of BP
22 without trenching on fundamental fairness. (People
v. Cuyugan, G.R. Nos. 146641-43, 18 November 2012).1

0.

Xa OECS officer was charged with falsification of
public document under Art, 171 of the Revised
Penal Code under an information which alleged
that he falsified an inspection report to make it
appear that materials were delivered to the DECS.
X was acquitted. Subsequently an information
was filed against X for the violation of Section 3(e)
of R.A. No. 3019 for causing undue injury to the
"compare with Poople v, Chua, 315 SCRA 326 (1999) wherein accused

was charged and convicted of estafa under Article 315(2(d) of the Revised
Penal Code. On appeal, the SC acquitted the accused since the checks issued
were in payment of a pre-existing obligation but convicted her of the violation of
BP. Bl.22. Itls submitted that Cayugan is the more persuasive ruling.

517

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
government, based on the same act of falsifying

the inspection report, X filed a motion to quash on
the ground of double Jeopardy, arguing that he
was being prosecuted anew for the same offense.
Should the motion be granted?

A.

No. Art. 171 of the RPC and Section 3(e) of R.A. No.
3019 are not the same since there is no identity of
elements between them. (Suero v. People, G.R. No.
156408, 31 January 2005) It should also be noted
that falsification of a public document is malum in se
while the violation of Section 3(e) is a malum prohibitum,
More importantly, Section 3 of R.A. No. 3019 contains
an "anti-absorption clause" which reads thus:

SEC 3. Corrupt practices of public officers.-- Ir
addition to acts or omissions of public officers already
penalized by existing laws the following shall constitute
corrupt practices of any public officer and are hereby
declared to be unlawful, (Underscoring supplied)
Q.

X hacked a police officer with a bolo inflicting less
serious physical injuries upon him. X was charged
and convicted of less serious physical injuries,
Subsequently X was charged with direct assault
upon a person of authority based on the same
hacking incident. May X invoke double jeopardy
on the ground that he is being charged anew with
the same offense?

A.

Yes. The same-offense requirement was satisfied if
the subsequent indictment is for "any offense which
necessarily includes ... the offense charged in the
former complaint or information," Where the criminal
act of the accused results in a complex crime. such as
less serious physical injuries with direct assault, but
he was charged and convicted only of less serious

518

RULE 117
Motion to Quash
physical injuries, such conviction constitutes a bar to
another prosecution for direct assault. (Tacas v.
Cariaso, 72 SCRA 528 [1976]).
Q.

Xstole 13 carabaos, 8 of which belonged to B and
5 to C. The theft happened at the same place and
time. X was prosecuted and convicted for the theft
of the 8 carabaos belonging to B. Subsequently X
was prosecuted for theft of the 5 carabaos belonging
to C. May X invoke double jeopardy?

A.

Yes. The second prosecution is for the same offense
because the theft of the 8 carabaos is an integral part
of the single crime of theft of all the carabaos.
(People v. Tumlos, 67 Phil, 320).

0.

X was charged and acquitted of intentional parricide
for shooting his wife. Subsequently K was charged
with reckless imprudence resulting in parricide
arising from the same shooting incident. May X
invoke double jeopardy?

A.

Yes. The reckless imprudence resulting in parricide
was included in the charge of intentional parricide.
(See Heirs of Honrales v. Honrales, G.R. No. 182651,
25 August 2010; Magno v. People, G.RR. No. 149725,
23 October 2003). What the court should have done
In the intentional parricide case was to convict X of
reckless imprudence resulting in homicide if the
evidence warranted it, pursuant to the variance
doctrine. (See Magno v. People, id.).

Q.

Following a collision, Petitloner Jason lvler was
charged with two offenses before the MeTC of
Pasig City: Reckless Imprudence Resulting in
Slight Physical Injuries (Crim. Case No. 82367) for
injuries suffered by Evangeline Ponce, and Reckless
Imprudence Resulting in Homicide for the death
of Nestor Ponce (Crim. Case No. 82366). Petitioner
519

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

pleaded guilty to Crim. Case No. 82367 and was
meted the penalty of public censure. Invoking this
conviction, Petitioner moved to quash Criminal Case

No. 82366 on the ground of double jeopardy.
Should Criminal Case No. 82366 be quashed?

A.

Yes. Criminal Case 82366 should be quashed since it
relates to the same offense. Reckless Imprudence ls
a single crime and its consequences on persons and
property are material only to determine the penalty.
(/vler v. Modesto-San Pedro, 17 November 2010)

Q.

X was charged and convicted of physical injuries
through reckless imprudence. Later X was charged
with damage to property through the same act of
reckless imprudence, both under Article 365 of
the Revised Penal Code. May X invoke double
jeopardy on the ground that he is being charged
for the same offense?

A.

Yes. The essence of criminal negligence under Article
365 is the imprudent or negligent act. Hence the
second prosecution is for the same offense, (Buerano
v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 30269, 9 July 1982)

Principle of Delito Continuado
0.

DKT Phils. filed a complaint with the Prosecutor's
Office of Tagbilaran City (OPP-Bohol) against its
manager Ana Navaja for falsification of private
document which was docketed as I.S. No. 04-1238.
In said preliminary investigation, Ms. Magsigay, a
material witness of DKT, was subpoenaed to
appear on 15 March 2004. However on 9 March 2004,
petitioner (husband of Ana Nava]a) went to
Magslgay's workplace in Garden Caf~, Jagna,
Bohol, and falsely told Magsigay that her attendance
was no longer required. Magsigay no longer
attended the scheduled 15 March 2004 hearing

520

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

where petitioner and Atty. Bonghanoy presented
an affidavit purportedly executed by Ms. Magsigay
and notarized by a certain Atty. Rolando Grapa
(Atty. Grapa) in Cebu City, supporting Ana
Nava]a's counter-affidavit. Resultantly, I.S. No. 04.
1238 was dismissed,
Meanwhile, respondent Atty. Borje, DKT's
counsel, found out from Ms. Magsigay herself
that: (a) she would have attended the scheduled
15 March 2004 hearing were it not for the
misrepresentation of petitioner, (b) she was
merely told by her superior in Garden Cafe to sign
the affidavit and that she did not personally
prepare the same; and (c) she could not have
gone to Cebu to have it notarized before Atty.
Grapa as she was at work on that day. This
prompted Atty. Borje to file the following criminal
complaints before the OPP-Bohol and the City
Prosecution Office ot Tagbilaran City: the first
one, charging petitioner of Obstruction of Justice,
specifically, for violation of Section 1(a) of PD
1829 in connection with the 9 March 2004 incident;
and the second one, charging petitioner and Atty.
Bonghanoy of Obstruction of Justice as well,
specifically, for violation of Section 1(f) of the same
law in connection with the 15 March 15, 2004
incident. Sec. 1(a) punishes the act of preventing
a witness from testifying in any criminal proceeding
while Sec. 1(f) punishes the presentation of a
falsified document In a criminal investigation.
After due proceedings, separate Informations

wore filed. The case relating to the 9 March 2004
Incident (violation of Section 1[a]) was filed before
the MCTC-Jagna, while that relating to the 15
March 2004 incident (violat was filed before the
MTCC-Tagbilaran.

521

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Consequently, petitioner filed a Motion to
Quash Information before the MCTC-Jagna,
arguing that the charge of violation of Section 1(a)
of pp 1829 pending before it should have been
absorbed by the charge of violation of Section 1(f)
pending before the MTCC-Tagbilaran, considering
that: (a) the case pending before the latter court
was filed first; (b) the criminal cases filed before
the MCTC-Jagna and MTCC-Tagbilaran arose from
a single preliminary investigation proceeding,
involving the same set of facts and circumstances,
and flowed from a single alleged criminal intent,
which is to obstruct the investigation of LS. No.
04-1238; and (c) to allow separate prosecutions of
the foregoing cases would be tantamount to a
violation of his right to double jeopardy. Should
the motion to quash be granted?

A.

Yes. While the informations pertain to acts that were
done days apart and in different locations, the Court
holds that petitioner should only be charged and held
liable for a single violation of PD 1829, This is
because the alleged acts, albeit separate, were
motivated by a single criminal impulse - that is, to
obstruct or impede the preliminary investigation
proceeding in IS. Case No, 04-1238, which was, in
fact, eventually dismissed by the OPP-Bohol. The
foregoing conclusion is premised on the principle of
delito continuado, which envisages a single crime
committed through a series of acts arising from one
criminal intent or resolution,
Thus, applying the principle of delito continuado,
petitioner should only be charged with one (1) count
of violation of PD 1829 which may be filed either in
Jagna, Bohol whore Ms. Magsigay was allegedly

522

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

prevented from appearing and testifying in I.S. Case
No, 04-1238, or in Tagbilaran City, Bohol where
petitioner allegedly presented a false affidavit in the
same case. However, since he was already chargedand in fact, convicted in a Judgment dated July 3,
2007 - in the MTCC-Tagbilaran, the case in MCTCJagna should be dismissed as the events that
transpired in Jagna, Bohol should only be deemed as
a partial execution of petitioner's single criminal
design The criminal case in MCTC-Jagna must be
dismissed; otherwise, petitioner will be unduly
exposed to double jeopardy. (Navaja v. De Castro, 11
September 2017, Perlas-Bernabe, J.).
Q.

Section 7 of the Cyborcrime Law provides that
prosecution thereunder is without prejudice to
liability under the Revised Penal Code and other
laws. Under the said law, online child pornography is
defined as the prohibited acts under the AntiChild Pornography Act committed through a
computer system while online libel is defined as
the libel defined under Article 355 of the Revised
Penal Code committed through a computer system
or any other similar means. May the said provision
be struck down as unconstitutional insofar as it
relates to online libel and online child pornography?

A.

Yes. There should be no question that if the publlshed
material on print, said to be libelous, is again posted
online or vice versa, that identical material cannot be
the subject of two separate libels. The two offenses,
one a violation of Article 353 of the Revised Penal
Code and the other a violation of Section 4(c)(4) of
R.A. 10175 involve essentially the same elements
and are in fact one and the same offense. Charging
the offender under both laws would be a blatant

523

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

violation of the constitutional proscription against
double jeopardy. The same observation also applies
to online child pornography which is already penalized
under the ACPA. (Disini v. Secretary of Justice, 18
February 2014),13
Q.

X was prosecuted for estafa and was convicted

under Article 315(2)(d) which penalizes the
issuance of a bouncing check. X appealed to the
Court of Appeals which convicted the accused Instead
under Article 315(2)(a) (through false pretenses or
similar deceits), X invokes double jeopardy,
contending that since the trial court had said that
Article 315(2)(a) was not applicable to him, he in
effect was acquitted of said provision and hence
the appellate court could not convict him thereunder.
ls X's contention correct?
A.

No. When X appealed from the sentence of the trial
court he waived the constitutional safeguard against
double jeopardy and threw the whole case open to
the review of the appellate court, which is then called
upon to render such judgment as the law and Justice
dictate, whether favorable or not and Whether assigned
as an error or not. (Ko Bu Lin v. Court of Appeals,
GR. No. 57170, 19 November 1982).

Q.

Appellant was charged with robbery with homicide.
The RTC convicted him of murder on its finding
that the Appellant could not have committed
robbery. He appealed to the Court of Appeals

which modified the judgment by convicting him of

0rn ruling is arguable.

Double jeopardy ls a ground to quash an

information or complaint, not a benchmark for legislation. The ruling seems t
have infringed on Congress's power to define and penalize offenses
perusal of Ko Bu Lin shows that the elements of estafa through false
pretenses was sufficiently averred in the information Hence the accuse could
be convicted of such crime on appeal,

524

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

robbery with homicide. Appellant maintained that
the CA erred in finding him liable for robbery with
homicide as charged in the amended information.
He argued that his appeal to the CA was limited to
his conviction for murder and excluded his
acquittal for robbery and that by appealing his
conviction for murder, he does not waive his
constitutional right not to be subject to double
jeopardy for the crime of robbery. He claimed that
even assuming that the RTC erred in acquitting
him of the robbery charge, such error can no
longer be questioned on appeal. Is the Appellant's
argument meritorious?
A.

No. An appeal in a criminal case opens the entire
case for review on any question including one not
raised by the parties. When an accused appeals from
the sentence of the trial court, he waives the
constitutional safeguard against double jeopardy and
throws the whole case open to the review of the
appellate court, which is then called upon to render
such judgment as law and justice dictate, whether
favorable or unfavorable to the appellant. In other
words, when appellant appealed the RTC's judgment
of conviction for murder, he is deemed to have
abandoned his right to invoke the prohibition on
double jeopardy since it became the duty of the
appellate court to correct errors as may be found in
the appealed judgment. Thus, appellant could not have
been placed twice in jeopardy when the CA modified
the ruling of the RTC by finding him guilty of robbery
with homicide as charged in the Information insteaa of
murder. (People v. Torres, 24 September 2014).

525

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

The rule under double jeopardy is that the conviction
of the accused shall bar another prosecution for
an offense which necessarily_includes the offense
charged in the former complaint or information
under which he was convicted. What is the
exception to this rule wherein the accused may
later on be charged for the graver offense which
necessarily includes the former offense charged?

A,

The exception to this rule wherein the accused may
later on be charged for the graver offense which
necessarily includes the former offense charged are
(SuCK)
(a) The graver offense developed due to supervening
facts arising from the same act or omission
constituting the former charge. Supervening facts
are those which arose after plea.

(b) The facts constituting the graver charge became
known or were discovered only after a plea was
entered in the former complaint or information.
Here the facts occurred before plea but became
known or were discovered only after plea.
(c) The plea of guilty to the lesser offense was made
without the consent of the prosecutor and the
offended party. However where the offended
party failed to appear in the arraignment despite
due notice, his consent to the guilty plea is
not required.
In any of the foregoing cases, where the accused
satisfies or serves in whole or in part the judgment, he
shall be credited with the same in the event of
conviction for the graver offense. (S7 R117)

526

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Q.

The accused pleaded guilty to the charge of less
serious physical injuries and was accordingly
convicted by the trial court. Subsequently the
prosecutor filed an Information for frustrated
murder against the accused based on the same
incident which gave rise to the charge of less
serious physical injurles, The accused filed a
motion to quash the information on the ground of
double jeopardy, The prosecutor argued that the
fact of the accused's intent to kill was discovered
by the prosecution and the complainant only after
the accused had been convicted.
a) Should the motion to quash be granted?

b)

Suppose the Intent to kill was Indicated In the
affidavits of the witnesses for the complainant
which were the basis for the filing of the
complaint, would your conclusion be different?

:
A.

a) No, the motion to quash should not be granted.
Under S7(b) R117, the conviction of the accused
shall not be a bar to another prosecution for an
offense which necessarily includes the offense
charged in the former complaint or information if the
facts constituting the graver charge became known or
were discovered only after a plea was entered in the
former complaint or information.

Here the intent to kill was discovered by the
prosecutor and the complainant only after the
accused had been convicted. Hence the accused's
conviction for less serious physical injuries would not
constitute double jeopardy.
b)

Yes, my conclusion would be different. In that
case the motion to quash on the ground of double
jeopardy should be granted.

527

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME l

Since the fact of the accused having an intent to
kill was known to the complainant and to the
prosecution before plea, the same would not fall
under the exception to the double jeopardy rule under
S7(a) or (b) R17. Hence the filing of the second
information for frustrated murder would place the
accused in double jeopardy since such charge for
frustrated murder necessarily includes the earlier
charge of less serious physical injuries.
Q.

For the multiple stab wounds sustained by the
victim, Noel was charged with frustrated homicide
in the Regional Trial Court. Upon arraignment, he
entered a plea of guilty to said crime. Neither the
court nor the prosecution was aware that the
victim had dled two days earlier on account of his
stab wounds,

Because of his guilty plea, Noel was
convicted of frustrated homicide and meted the
corresponding penalty. When the prosecution
learned of the victim's death, it filed within fifteen
days therefrom a motior to amend the Information
to upgrade the charge from frustrated homicide to
consummated homicide. Noel opposed the motion
claiming that the admission of the amended
information would place him in double jeopardy.
Resolve the motion with reasons. (05 Bar 015).
A.

The motion to amend the information from frustrated
homicide to consummated homicide should be granted.
Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
conviction of the accused shall not be a bar to another
prosecution for an offense which necessarily includes
the offense charged in the former information if
the facts constituting the graver charge became
known or were discovered only after the filing of the
former information.

528

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

Here the fact constituting the graver charge of

consummated homicide, that is, the death of the
victim became known to the prosecution only after the
filing of the former information for frustrated homicide.
Hence Noel's conviction for frustrated homicide

shall not be a bar to another prosecution for
consummated homicide."

Extinction of the criminal action or liability
0.

X was charged before the MTC of the crime of

grave oral defamation. After trial, X was convicted
of the lesser crime of simple_slander. At the time
the information for grave oral defamation was
filed, the crime of simple slander had already
prescribed, May X move to set aside the judgment
of conviction?
A.

Yes. Where an accused has been found to have
committed a lesser offense included in the offense
charged, he cannot be convicted of the lesser offense
if it had already prescribed. To hold otherwise would
be to sanction the circumvention of the law on
prescription by the simple expedient of accusing
defendant of the graver offense. (See Francisco v.
Court of Appeals, 122 SCRA 538 (1983))

Q.

The accused filed a motion to quash on the
ground that the Information did not state the date
of the commission of the offense and hence did
not conform substantially to the prescribed form,
Should the court grant the motion to quash?

g¢

malter of strict procedure, the motion to amend the information
from frustrated homicide to consummated hormnic.de was imprecise since the
accused Noel had already been convicted and should in fact serve the sentence
forthwith. The prosecution should simply file a ew information for consummated
homicide, The servie of the sentence should be credited to Noel if he is
convicted of the consummated homicide charge. The examinee should retrain
from discussing this matter though since it is not the issue posed by the question,

529

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No, If the motion to quash is based on an alleged
defect of the complaint or information which can be
cured by amendment, the court shall order that an
amendment be made. (S4 R117)
Here the defect of the information can be easily
cured by an amendment by specifying the specific
date or if not possible a date as near as possible to
the actual ate of the commission. (S11 R110).

Q.

What is a provisional dismissal?

A.

A provisional dismissal is an order dismissing a case
provisionally, that is, a dismissal without prejudice to
the revival of the case within the one-year or two-year
period provided for in S8 R117, Since the dismissal is

only provisional, it requires the express consent of the
accused. The grounds for a provisional dismissal are
not set forth in S8 RR117, but it is generally understood
as any ground other than those for a motion to quash
under S3 R117 A common ground is difficulty in
presenting prosecution witnesses in court. The
accused, where appropriate, may move to dismiss the
information on the ground of denial of his right to a
speedy trial (S9 R119) or he may expressly consent
to a provisional dismissal.
Q.

State the rule on provisional dismissal.

A.

A case shall not be provisionally dismissed except
with the px_tress consent of the accused and with
notice to the offended party.

The provisional dismissal of offenses punishable
by imprisonment not exceeding f_years and/or a fine
of any amourt shall become automatically" permanent
1 gear after issuance of the order without the case
having been revived. With respect to offenses
"see also Sec 14, A.M. No. 12-11-2-$C, eff 1 May 2014.

530

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

punishable by imprisonment of more than 6 years,
their provisional dismissal shall become permanent
automatically Z
/ears after issuance of the order
without the case having been revived.
Q.

Pedro was charged with the violation of Section
261(q) of the Omnibus Election Code for violating

the election gun ban, le., for carrying a firearm
outside of hls residence or place of business
without any authority from the Comelec. Pedro
filed a motion to quash on the ground that the
information contains averments which if true
would constitute a legal excuse or justification
and on the ground that the facts charged do not
constitute an offense. Pedro attached to his
motion a purported Comelec certification that he
is exempt from the gun-ban. The RTC quashed the
information. More than a year after the prosecution's
receipt of the order quashing the information, the
prosecution moved to reopen the case on the
ground that the certification submitted by Pedro
was spurious. The RTC granted the motion.
Pedro moved for the reconsideration of the order
arguing that under S8 R117, the dismissal became
permanent pursuant to the time-bar rule. ls
Pedro's contention correct?

A.

No. A dismissal based on a motion to quash under
the grounds set forth in S3 R117 is not governed by
the time-bar rule under S8 R117 but by S6 RR117
which provides that an order sustaining the motion to
quash is not a bar to another prosecution for the
same offense unless the motion was based on the
ground that the criminal action or liability has been
extinguished or on the ground of double jeopardy.
(ED) The failure of the Rules to state under Section
6 that a Section 8 provisional dismissal is a bar to

531

...

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

further prosecution shows that the framers did not
intend a dismissal based on a motion to quash and a
provisional dismissal to be confused with one another;
Section 8 operates in a world of its own separate from
motion to quash, and merely provides a time-bar that
uniquely applies to dismissals other than those
grounded on Section 3. Conversely, when a dismissal

is pursuant to a motion to quash under Section 3,
Section 8 and its time-bar does not apply. (Los Ba0s
v. San Pedro, G.R. No. 173588, 22 April 2009, [e.b.]
Brion, 4.)
Q.

Respondent New Prosperity Plastic Products,
represented by Elizabeth Uy, is the private
complainant in Criminal Cases for Violation of

B.P, BI. 22 filed against petitioner William Co,
which were raffled to the MeTC of Caloocan City,
In the absence of Uy and the private counsel, the
cases were provisionally dismissed on 9 June
2003 in open court upon motion of the accused
pursuant to S8 R117. Uy received a copy of the 9
June 2003 Order on 2 July 2003, while her counsel
of record received a copy a day after (3 July). On 2
July 2004, Uy, through counsel, filed a Motion to
Revive the Criminal Cases. The accused opposed
the motion on the ground that the provisional
dismissal had become permanent since more
than one year had lapsed from the issuance of the
order of provisional dismissal, The accused also
argued that both the motion to revive and the
court order of revival must be made within the
one-year period.
a)

May the criminal cases be revived?

b)

Would your answer be the same if the private
counsel received the order of provisional
dismissal also on 2 July 2003, taking into
account that 2004 Is a leap year?

532

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

A.

a) Yes. Although S8 RR117 states that the order of
dismissal shall become permanent one year after the

issuance thereof without the case having been
revived, the provision should be construed to mean
that the order of dismissal shall become permanent
one year after service of the order of dismissal on the
public prosecutor who has control of the prosecution
without the criminal case having been revived. If the
offended party is represented by a private counsel the

better rule is that the reckoning period should
commence to run from the time such private counsel

was actually notified of the order of provisional
dismissal. When a party is represented by a counsel,
notices of all kinds emanating from the court should
be sent to the latter at his/her given address.
Here the order of provisional dismissal was
received by the private counsel on 3 July 2003. Hence
the motion to revive filed on 2 July 2004 was filed
within the one year period.
The contention that both the filing of the motion
to revive the case and the court order reviving it must
be made prior to the expiration of the one-year period
is unsustainable, Such interpretation is not found in
the Rules. Moreover, to permit otherwise would
definitely put the offended party at the mercy of the
trial court, which may wittingly or unwittingly not
comply. Judicial notice must be taken of the fact that
most, if not all, of our trial court judges have to deal
with clogged dockets in addition to their administrative
duties and functions.
b)

Yes. Under the Administrative Code of 1987, a
year is composed of 12 calendar months, Hence
the fact that February 2004 had 29 days is
irrelevant since the law speaks of calendar

533

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

months. Hence a motion to revive filed on 2 July
2004 was within 12 calendar months from 2 July
2003. (Co v. New Prosperity Plastic Products,
Inc., 30 June 2014)

O.

How is a criminal case revived after a provisional
dismissal?

A.

By the filing of a motion to revive and the issuance of
an order of revival. The motion to revive must be filed
within the one-year or two-year period but the order of

revival may be issued thereafter. (Id.). After the
issuance of the order of revival, the case essentially
continues from where it left oft.'?
0.

Petitioner was charged with selling and possessing

dangerous drugs in violation of the Comprehensive
Dangerous Drugs Act. However the prosecution's
princlpal witness, the arresting officer PO2 Villas,
failed to attend two hearings prompting the court
to provisionally dismiss the case with the express
consent of the Petitioner during the 16 May 2013
hearing. On 5 June 2013, PO2 Villas filed a Motion
to Revive the Case against petitioner. PO2 Villas
explained that his failure to appear during the
hearings of the cases was due to the untimely
doath of his father-in-law, The court granted the
motion to revive. On petition for certiorari, the
Petitioner argues that the judge acted with grave
abuse of discretion in reviving the case since it was
not the prosecutor who filed it but rather the
arresting officer. Is the Petitioner's argument correct?

People v. Lacson, 400 SCRA 267 (2003) t ws stated the; that the
case may be revlved by the State within the time-bar ether by the refiling of the
r formation r by the filing of a new Information for the same offense or an
offense necessarily ircused therein. ff is opined that the bettor rule is that an
order of revival would suffice, es is the practice before the courts

534

RULE 117
Motion to Quash

A.

In the case at bar, it must be noted that the accused
is charged with a public crime, hence, it is a victimless crime. Unlike in private crimes where the
participation of the private offended party is generally

required for the recovery of civil liability, in the instant
case, there is no particular private offended party who
can actually file the motion to revive. Hence, in some
instances, as in this case, it is the arresting officer,
PO2 Villas, who filed the motion to revive the case out
of his sense of duty as a police officer and compelled
by his sense of obligation considering that he knew
his absence was the cause why the complaint was
provisionally dismissed. (Saldariega v. Panganiban,
15 April 2015, Peralta, J).
Q.

What is the remedy of the accused If the criminal
case is rofiled after the provisional dismissal has
become permanent?

A.

The accused may file a motion to quash on the
ground of double jeopardy. The reason is that the
permanent dismissal shall amount to an adjudication
of the case on the merits. (See Sec, 14, A.M. No. 1211-2-SC, elf. 1 May 2014)

Q.

Distinguish a motion to quash from a provisional
dismissal under $8 R117.
MOTION TO QUASH

PROVISIONAL DISMISSAL

Includes permanent

Essentially refers to dismissal
temporary in character.

dismissal, e.g., double

of

jeopardy & extinction
criminal liability or action.

�
S8 R117 does not state the
grounds therefor.

Grounds are specified under
$3 R117

535

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Consequences of quashal

Consequences of dismissal

governed by $4-7R117.
governed by s8 R117.
At the Instance of accused.

At the Instance of
either the prosecution or

accused or of both.
Form and contents governed
by $2 R117

S2 R117 not applicable.

Grounded on defects or

May be grounded on reasons
other than defects found In
the information or complaint

defenses apparent on the
face of the information or
comwlaint.
Filed before arraignment.

May be allowed after
arraignment and even during
trial.

Does not per se carry any
connotation of

Impermanent untit time-bar
rule applles

-Impermanence.
'
(Los Baros v. San Pedro, G.R. No. 173588, 22 April

2009, [e.b.] Brion, A.).
0.

What is the effect of the accused's failure to
assert any ground of a motion to quash before
plea, either because he did not file a motion to
quash or because he failed to allege such ground
in the motion to quash he had filed?

A.

Such failure shall be deemed a waiver of the grounds
of the motion to quash not so asserted. The
exceptions would be the following grounds: (JENDO)
1) Lack of jurisdiction over the offense charged.
2) Extinction of the criminal action or liability

536

I

RULE 117

Motion to Quash

3) Facts charged in the complaint or information do
not constitute an offense.
4) Double jeopardy

5)

The officer who filed the information haa no
authority to do so. (S9 R117; Cudia v. Court of

Appeals, 284 SCRA 173)
In any of the foregoing cases, the motion to
quash may be filed even after plea

537

RULE 118, PRE-TRIAL
Q.

ls pre-trial mandatory in criminal cases?

A.

Yes pre-trial is mandatory in all criminal cases cognizable
by the Sandiganbayan, MTC, and RTC. (MRS)

0.

What matters shall be considered during the
pre-trial?

A.

The court shall order a pre-trial conference to consider
the following matters: (PMS WTO)

(a) Plea bargaining

(b) Stipulation of facts.
(c) Marking for identification of evidence of the parties.

(d) Waiver of objections to admissibility of evidence.

(e) Modification of the order of trial if the accused

admits the charge but interposes a lawful defense.
(f)

Such (other) matters as will promote a fair and
expeditious trial (fet) of the criminal and civil
aspects of the case. (S1 R118).

Q.

What is plea bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the prosecutor
in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to court approval. It
usually involves the defendant's pleading guilty to a
lesser offense or to only one or some of the counts of
a multi-count indictment in return for a lighter
sentence than that for the graver charge. (Black's Law
Dictionary, 5" ed., 1979)

538

RULE 118
Pre-Trial

0.

What is the requirement for agreements and
admissions made or entered during the pre-trial
conference?

A.

All agreements or admissions made or entered during
the pre-trial conference shall be reduced in writing
and signed by the accused and counsel; otherwise
they cannot be used against the accused. The
agreements covering the matters referred to in Sf
R118 shall be approved by the court. (S2 R118)

0.

During the pre-trial, Bembol personally offered to
settle the case for P1 Million to the private
prosecutor, who immediately put the offer on
record In the presence of the trial judge. Is
Bembol's offer a judicial admission of his guilt?
(08 Bar Q8b)

A.

No. Under S2 R118, all agreements or admissions
made or entered during the pre-trial conference shall
be reduced in writing and signed by the accused
and counsel; otherwise they cannot be used against
the accused.
Here Bembol's offer was merely oral. Hence the
same cannot be used against him

Q

What is the consequence of the non-appearance
of counsel at the pre-trial conference?

A.

If the counsel for the accused or the prosecutor does
not appear at the pre-trial conference and does not
offer an acceptable excuse for his lack of cooperation,
the court may impose proper sanctions or penalties.

(S3 R118). The court may cite counsel for contempt
or impose fines upon him.

539

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

When shall the court issue a pre-trial order? What
the contents and the effects of the pre-trial order?

A.

After the pre-trial conference, the court shall issue an
order reciting the actions taken, the facts stipulated,
and evidence marked (FEA)

Such order shall bind the parties, limit the trial to

matters not disposed of, and control the course of
action during the trial (BLC), unless modified by the
court to prevent manifest injustice. (S4 R118).
Q.

What criminal cases shall be referred to mediation
on the civil liability thereof?

A.

(a) The following cases shall be referred to mediation
on the civil liability unless a settlement is reached

earlier in the pre-trial/preliminary conference:
) Crimes where payment may prevent criminal
prosecution or may extinguish criminal liability,
such as violations of
a) B.P. Big. 22;
b) SSS Law (RA. No. 1161, as amended by
R.A. No. 8282); and
c) PAG-4BIG Law (R.A. No, 9679)

ii) Crimes against property under Title 10 of the
Revised Penal Code (RPC), where the
obligation may be civil in nature, such as:

a) Theft under Art. 308, RPC, cognizable by the
first level courts;
b) Estafa under Art. 315(1), RPC, except estafa
under Art. 315 (2) and (3);
c) Others forms of swindling under Art. 316, RPC;

540

RULE 118
Pre-Trial

d) Swindling of a minor under Art. 317, RPC;
e) Other deceits under Art. 318, RPC; and

I) Malicious mischief under Art. 327, RPC
iii) Crimes against honor under Title 13, RPC,
where the liability may be civil in nature, such as
a) Libel by means of writings or similar means
under Art. 355, RPC;
b) Threatening to publish and offer to present
such publication for a compensation under
Art. 356, RPC;
c) Prohibited publication of acts referred to in
the course of official proceedings under Art.
357, RPC;

d) Grave Slander (Grave Oral Defamation) - of
serious and insulting nature under Art. 358,

par. 1, RPC;
e) Simple Slander (Oral Defamation) - not of a
serious and insulting nature under Art 358,
par.2, RPC,

f)

Grave

Slander

by

Deed

-

of

a

serious

nature

under Art. 359, par. 1 RPC;
g) Simple Slander by Deed -

not of a serious

nature Art. 359, par. 2, RPC;
h)

Incriminating Innocent person under Art.
363, RPC;

i) lntrlgu1ng against honor under Art. 364, RPC;
iv) Libel under R.A, 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention
Act of 2012) where the liability may be civil
In nature;

541

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
v) Criminal negligence under Title 14, RPC,
where the liability may be civil in nature; and
vi) Intellectual property rights cases where the
liability may be civil in nature.

0.

When shall criminal cases be referred to the

Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit?
A,

The referral of the case for mediation to the Philippine
Mediation Center (PMC) Unit shall be made only after
the conduct of the arraignment and the pre-trial/

preliminary conference, The court shall serve the
Order of Referral to the PMC Unit immediately after

the arraignment and the pre-trial/preliminary conference.
(Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal
Cases).

0.

When shall the mediation be terminated?

A,

The Mediation shall be terminated within a nonextendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from the
date of referral by the court to the PMC Unit. After the
lapse of the mediation period or if mediation fails, trial
shall proceed. (Revised Guidelines for Continuous
Trial of Criminal Cases)

•

Shall cases subject to the Rule on Summary
Procedure be referred to mediation?

A.

No. Except those cases mentioned previously, criminal

cases subject to the Rule on Summary Procedure
shall not be referred to mediation. (Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).

0.

May criminal cases for violation of the VOWCHI
(R.A. No. 9262) be referred to mediation?

A.

No. (0CA Circular No. 51-2011)

542

RULE 119. TRIAL
O.

What are the instances when the accused's presence
is required under the Rules?

A,

The instances when the accused's presence is
required by the Rules are the following: (APIP)
(a) During the arraignment.
(b) During the pre-trial conference, when required by
the court. (MANGONTAWAR M. GUBAT, THE
REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
ANNO, 370-71 [3" ed., 2009))
(c) During the trial, when required by the court for
purposes of identification.
(d) During the promulgation of the judgment, unless it

ls for a light offense in which case the accused
may appear by counsel or representative.
At such stages of the proceedings, the accused's
presence is required and cannot be waived, (People
v. De Grano, 5 June 2009).

0.

What are the requisites of a motion to postpone
trial for absence of evidence?

A.

A motion to postpone a trial on the ground of absence
of evidence can be granted only upon affidavit
showing the materiality or relevancy of such evidence,
and that due diligence has been used to procure it.

But if the adverse party admits the facts to be given in
evidence, even if he objects or reserves the right to
object to their admissibility, the trial shall not be
postponed. (S3 R30),

543

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

What is trial in absentia?

A.

The

trial

of a

criminal

case

which

proceeds

notwithstanding the absence of the accused provided

that the accused was arraigned, duly notified of the
hearing or trial, and his failure to appear thereat is
unjustifiable. (ANU) (Sec. 14[2], Art. III, Constitution).
Q.

After the accused had been arraigned, he failed to
appear during the trial despite notice, The Judge
ordered that the case be archived. Was the
order proper?

A.

No. The judge cannot archive case if accused had
been arraigned. Trial in absentia should be conducted.
(Visbal v. Judge Van/Ila, 7 April 2009).

0.

What is the time limit within which the accused
must be brought to trial?

A.

The trial shall commence within 3Q days from receipt
of the pre-trial order. (S1 R119)"

0.

What is the remedy where the accused is not
brought to trial within the time limit?

A,

The information may be dismissed on motion of the
accused on the ground of denial of his right to speedy
trial. Failure of the accused to move for dismissal prior

to trial shall constitute a waiver of such right to
dismiss, (S9 R119)
0.

Give the time limits to be observed in the
prosecution of a case against a detained accused.

A.

It shall be the duty of the trial court, the public or
private prosecutor, and the defense counsel to ensure,

subject to the excluded delays specified in 119 and
rye ire limit was modified by Sec. 8 of A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, effective
1 May 2014

544

RULE 119
Trial

the Speedy Trial Act of 1998, compliance with the

following time limits in the prosecution of the case
against a detained accused:
(a) The case of the accused shall be raffled and
referred to the trial court to which it is assigned
within three days from the filing of the information;
(b) The court shall arraign the accused within 10 days
from the date of the raffle;
(c) The court shall hold the pre-trial conference within
30 days after arraignment or within 10 days if the
accused is under preventive detention; provided,
however, that where the direct testimonies of the
witnesses are to be presented through judicial
affidavits, the court shall give the prosecution not
more than 20 days from arraignment within which
to prepare and submit their judicial affidavits in
time for the pre-trial conference;
(d) After the pre-trial conference, the court shall set
the trial of the case in the pre-trial order not later
than 30 days from the termination of the pre-trial
conference; and
(e) The court shall terminate the regular trial within
180 days, or the trial by judicial affidavits within
60 days, reckoned from the date trial begins, minus
the excluded delays or postponements specified
in R119 and the Speedy Trial Act of 1998. (Section
8, A.M. No.12-11-2-SC, effective 1 May 2014)
Q.

What Is the remedy of a detained accused if the
above time limits are not observed?

A.

The case against the detained accused may be
dismissed on ground of denial of the right to speedy
trial in the event of failure to observe the above time
limits. (Sec. 9, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014)

545

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Give the rules on provisional dismissal due to
absence of an essential witness in cases involving a

detained accused.

A.
(a) When the delays are due to the absence of an
essential witness whose whereabouts are unknown
or cannot be determined and, therefore, are
subject to exclusion in determining compliance
with the prescribed time limits which caused the

trial

to

exceed

180

days,

the

court

shall

provisionally dismiss the action with the express

consent af the detained accused
(b) Whon the delays are due to the absence of an
essential witness whose presence cannot be
obtained by due diligence though his whereabouts
are known, the court shall provisionally dismiss
the action with the express consent of the
detained accused provided:( 1) the hearing in the
case has been previously twice postponed due to
the non-appearance of the essential witness and
both the witness and the offended party, if they
are two different persons, have been given notice
of the setting of the case for third hearing, which
notice contains a warning that the case would be
dismissed if the essential witness continues to be
absent; and (2) there is proof of service of the
pertinent notlces of hearings or subpoenas upon
the essential witness and the offended party at
their last known postal or e-mail addresses or
mobile phone numbers.
(c) For the above purpose, the public or private
prosecutor shall first present during the trial the
essential witness or witnesses to the case before
anyone else. An essential witness is one whose

546

RULE 119
Trlal

testimony dwells on the presence of some or all
of the elements of the crime and whose testimony
Is indispensable to the conviction of the accused
(Sec. 10, A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014)
Q.

From when is the 1-year or 2-year for reviving a
provisionally dismissed criminal case under S8
R117 reckoned? What is the result if the case ls
not revived within the required period?

A.

The one or two-year period allowed for reviving a
criminal case that has been provisionally dismissed
shall be reckoned from the Issuance of the order of
dismissal,° The dismissal shall become automatically
permanent If the case is not revived within the required
period. Such permanent dismissal shall amount to an
adjudication of the case on the merits. (Sec. 14, A.M
No. 12-11-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014).

Q.

Accused was charged with rape and detained.
The private complainant filed a petition for
transfer of venue. Pretrial was conducted and
terminated. On the date set for the trial, the
prosecution filed a motion for continuance citing
the pendency of the petition for transfer of venue.
The accused filed a motion to dismiss the case on
the ground of the violation of his right to a speedy
trial Invoking S1 R119 which provides that trial
shall be conducted within 30 days from receipt of
the pretrial order. The prosecution argued that the
time during which the petition for transfer of
venue was pending should be excluded from the
30-day period citing S3(a)(5) R119. The trial court

re ruling in Co • New Prosperity Plastl Products, 30 Junie 2014,
that the one or two-year period ls reckoned from the notice of the order of
dismissal by the public prosecutor, or the private counsel if the offended panty is
represented by one, Is applicable mutatis mutandis.

547

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

dismissed the case and the prosecution brought
the matter up to the SC by way of certiorari under
R65, Did the trial court act properly in dismissing
the case?
A.

Yes. A careful reading of S3(a)(5) R119 would show
that the only delays that may be excluded from the
time limit within which trial must commence are those
resulting from proceedings concerning the accused.
The time involved in the proceedings in a petition for
transfer of venue can only be excluded from said time

limit if it was the accused who instituted the same
Here, in this case, the time during which the
petition for transfer of venue filed by the private
complainant is pending, cannot be excluded from the
time limit of thirty (30) days from receipt of the pre-trial
order for the trial to commence imposed in S1 R119.
Hence the trial court acted properly in dismissing the
case. (Mari v. Gonzalez, 12 September 2011).
Q.

Who has the burden of proof in the motion to
dismiss on ground of denial of right to speedy
trial?

A.

The accused shall have the burden of proving the
motion but the prosecutlon shall have the burden of
going forward with the evidence to establish the
exclusion of time under S3 R 119.

Q.

Will the dismissal on ground of denial of right to
speedy trial give rise to double jeopardy?

A.

Yes. Dismissal for denial of the right to a speedy trial
is a dismissal on the merits and amounts to an acquittal.
(Salcedo v. Mendoza, 88 SCRA 811; Esmena v.
Pogoy, 102 SCRA 861)

548

RULE 119
Trial

S9 R119 provides that the dismissal shall be
subject to the rules on double jeopardy. Hence
provided that the requisites of double jeopardy under
S7 R117 are met, the dismissal would amount to an
acquittal. The judge's decision on whether there was
a violation of the right to a speedy trial is of course

subject to review by the special civil action for
certiorari if made with grave abuse of discretion
amounting to lack of or excess of jurisdiction
Q.

What are the grounds under which a witness for
the accused may be conditionally examined
before trial? What must be set forth in the motion
for conditional examination of witness?

A.

The grounds under which a witness for the accused
may be conditionally examined before trial are:
(sIOS)
1) The witness is sic or infirm as to afford reasonable

ground for believing that he will not be able to
attend the trial; or
2) The witness resides more than one hundred (100)
kilometers from the place of trial and has no
means to attend the same; or
3) Other similar circumstances exist that would
make him unavailable or prevent himn from
attending the trial.

The accused shall file a motion for conditional
examination with notice to the other parties and the
motion shall state the name and residence of the
witness, the substance of his testimony, and the
ground for his unavailability. (S12 R119).

549

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

How is the conditional examination of a witness
for the accused made?

A.

The court shall issue an order directing that the
witness be examined at a specific date, time, and
place and that a copy of the order be served on the
prosecutor at least 3 days before the scheduled
examination The examination shall be taken before a

judge, or, If not practicable, a member of the Bar in good
standing so designated by the judge in the order, or if
the order be made by a court of superior Jurisdiction,
before an inferior court to be designated therein (JIB)
The examination shall proceed notwithstanding the

absence of the prosecutor provided he was duly
notified of the hearing. (S13 R119).
Q.

What are the grounds for conditional examination
of witness for the prosecution? How is the
examination made?

A.

The grounds for conditional examination of a witness
for the prosecution are; (SIL)

1) The witness is too sick or infirm to appear at the
trial as directed by the court; or
2) The witness has to leave the Philippines with no
definite date of returning.
The examination shall be made before the court
where the case is rending and shall be made in the
presence of the accused or In his absence after
reasonable notice to attend the examination has been
served on him. The examination shall be conducted in
the same manner as an examination at the trial. The
statement taken may be admitted in behalf of or
against the accused. Failure or refusal of the accused
to attend the examination after notice shall be
considered a waiver. (S15 R119)

550

RULE 119
Trial

Q

Raul Rodrigo was charged with robbery with
homicide before the Regional Trial Court of Rizal.
After presenting 3 witnesses, the prosecution could
no longer proceed since Its 2 most instrumental
witnesses, AB and CD, are now both permanently
residing in the United States. The prosecutor then
moved to have their depositions taken by way of
written interrogatories. Their depositions having
been taken although without the participation of
accused Raul Rodrigo, the prosecutor now seeks
to Introduce the same contending that without Its
admission, there will be a failure of justice since
at its present stage, there is not even a prima
facie case against Rodrigo. Over the vigorous
objection of the defense, the trial court admitted
said depositions. Rodrigo was convicted and
thereafter sentenced to reclusion perpetua.

Discuss with reasons the tenability of the trial
court's ruling on the admission of said depositions.
(85 Bar 010).
A.

The trial court's ruling on the admission of the
depositions is untenable. Under S15 R119 the conditional
examination of the witnesses for the prosecution
should be done before the court where the case
is pending.
Here the deposition or examination was not done
in the RTC of Rizal but in fact in the United States
without any opportunity on the part of Rodrigo to
cross-examine AB and CD. Hence their depositions
are inadmissible in evidence for being violative of S15
R119 and for being hearsay.

551

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Petitioners were charged with the MeTC for Other

Deceits under Art. 318 of the Revised Penal Code.
The prosecution's complaining witness was Li
Luen Ping, a frail, old businessman from Cambodia.
The private prosecutor filed with the MoTC a
motion to take oral deposition of Li before the
Philippine consular official in Cambodia, alleging

that Li was being treated for lung infection in
Cambodla and upon doctor's advice, he could not
make the long travel to the Philippines by reason
of Ill health. Notwithstanding the Petitioners'
objections, the MeTC granted the motion. Did the
MeTC act correctly In granting the motion to take
oral deposition?

A.

No. The procedure under Rule 23 t0 28 of the Rules
of Court allows the taking of depositions in civil cases,
either upon oral examination or written interrogatories,
before any Judge, notary public or person authorized
to administer oaths at any time or place within the
Philippines; or before any Philippine consular official,
commissioned officer or person authorized to
administer oaths in a foreign state or country, with no
additional requirement except reasonable notice in
writing to the other party.
But for purposes of taking the deposition in
criminal cases, more particularly of a prosecution
witness who would forseeably be unavailable for trial,
the testimonial examination should be made before
the court, or at least before the Judge, where the case
is pending as required by the clear mandate of S15
R119. To do otherwise would violate the accused's
right to confront the witnesses against him. (Go v.
People, 18 July 2012).

552

RULE 119

Trial
Q.

In October 2010, the District Court of Yogyakarta,
Indonesia, convicted Mary Jane Veloso, a Filipino
maid, of drug trafficking and sentenced her to
death by firing squad.
Meanwhile, in the Philippines, Cristina and
Julius, who had allegedly recruited and trafficked
Mary Jane, were arrested by the NBI. Thereafter,
they were charged with qualified trafficking in
person in violation of "Anti-Trafficking in Persons
Act of 2003."
On 28 April 2015, or a few hours before the
scheduled execution of Mary Jane, the President
of Indonesia granted her an indefinite reprieve.
President Widodo had received reports about the
ongoing legal proceedings in the Philippines with
respect to the case of Mary Jane and that her
recruiters were already In police custody. Hence,
the Indonesian authorities deferred indefinitely the
execution of Mary Jane to afford her an opportunity
to present her case against Cristina and Julius
who were allegedly responsible for recruiting and
exploiting her to engage in drug trafficking.

The Indonesian authorities however imposed
the following conditions relative to the taking of
Mary Jane's testimony, viz.: Mary Jane shall
remain in detention in Yogyakarta, Indonesia; no
cameras shall be allowed; the lawyers of the
parties shall not be present; and the questions to
be propounded to Mary Jane shall be in writing.
Thereafter, in the qualified trafficking case,
the prosecution filed a "Motion for Leave of Court
to Take the Testimony of Complainant Mary Jane
Veloso by Depositin
o Upon Written Interrogatories."
Cristina and Julius objected to the motion asserting
that the deposition should be made before and

553

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEOIAL LAW
VOLUME II
not during the trial. They argued that such method
of taking testimony will violate their right to

confront the witness, Mary Jane, as provided
under Section 14(2) of the Constitution. The RTC

granted the prosecution's motion.
Cristina

and

Julius

filed

a

Petition

for

Certiorari and Prohibition with the Court of
Appeals averring that the trial court judge gravely
abused her discretion in granting the motion. The
CA set aside the trial court's grant of the motion.

The CA held that the conditional examination of
witnesses in criminal proceedings are primarily
governed by R119 and thus, Mary Jane's conditional

examination must be made not in Indonesia but
before the court where the case is pending. Did
the CA act correctly in setting aside the RTC order
allowing the taking of Mary Jane's deposition by
written interrogatories?

A.

No. The peculiar factual circumstances, i.e., Mary
Jane's conviction by final judgment and her detention
in a prison facility in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, while
awaiting execution by firing squad; the grant by the
Indonesian President of an indefinite reprieve in view
of the ongoing legal proceedings against Cristina and
Julius in the Philippines; and the conditions attached
to the reprieve particularly that Mary Jane should
remain in confinement in Indonesia, and that any
question propounded to her must only be in writing,
are more than enough grounds to have allowed the
suppletory application of R23.
S15 R119 is inapplicable. Mary Jane's situation
is not akin to a person whose limitation of mobility is
by reason of ill-health or feeble age, the grounds cited
in $15 R119. Mary Jane's predicament does not in
way pertain to a restriction in movement from one
place to another but a deprivation of liberty thru
554

RULE 119
Trial

detention in a foreign country with little or no hope of
being saved from the extreme penalty of death by
firing squad. Her imprisonment in Indonesia and the
conditions attached to her reprieve denied her of any
opportunity to decide for herself to voluntarily appear
and testify before the RTC in Nueva Ecija where the
cases of Cristina and Julius were pending. (People v.
Sergio, 9 October 2019, Hernando, 4.)"
Q.

Describe the procedure wherein an accused or
accused may be discharged to be a state witness.

A.

When two or more persons are jointly charged with
the commission of any offense, upon motion of the
prosecution before resting its case, the court may
direct one or more of the accused to be discharged
with their consent so that they may be state witnesses.
(S17 R119)

Q.

What are the requisites for the discharge of an
accused to be a state witness?

A.

There shall be a hearing in support of the discharge
where the prosecution shall present @vidence and the
8worn statement of each proposed state witness to
prove that: (CNN CG)
(a) There is absolute necessity for the testimony of
the accused whose discharge is requested;

(b) There is no other direct evidence available for the

proper prosecution of the offense committed,
except the testimony of said accused;
(c) The testlmony of said accused can be substantially
corroborated in its material points;

rpe ruling should be considered as pro hac vice or applicable only to
the peculiar tactual circumstances of the case.

555

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(d) Said accused does not appear to be the most
guilty; and
(e) Said accused has not at any time been convicted
of any offense involving moral turpitude. (S17

R119).
Q.

Louise is being charged with the frustrated
murder of Roy, The prosecution's lone witness,
Mariter, testified to having seen Louise prepare

the poison which she later surreptitiously poured
Into

Roy's

wine

glass.

Louise

sought

the

disqualification of Mariter as witness on account

of her previous conviction for perjury.
1) XXX

2) Can Mariter be utilized as state witness If she
is a co-accused in the criminal case? (94 Bar
010)

A.
2) No, Mariter cannot be utilized as state witness.
Under S17 R119 it ls required that the accused
who is sought to be discharged as a state witness has
not at any time been convicted of any offense
involving moral turpitude.
Perjury is an offense involving moral turpitude.
Hence Mariter cannot be utilized as a state witness.
Q.

May the court consider the evidence adduced in
support of the discharge?

A

Yes since such evidence shall automatically form part

of the trial. However if the court denies the motion for
discharge of the accused as a state witness, his
sworn statement shall be inadmissible in evidence.
(S17 R119)
556

RULE 119
Trial

Q.

In January 2011, Venson Evangelista, a car
salesman, was abducted by the brothers Roger
and Raymond Dominguez, Jayson Miranda, and
Alfred Mendiola. His charred remains were later
discovered. An information for carnapping with
homicide was subsequently filed with the RTC of
Quezon City against the Dominguez brothers,
Miranda, and Mendiola. Before the trial, the
prosecution filed a motion to discharge Mendiola
as a state witness. In the hearing on the motion
to discharge, Mendiola testified in graphic detail
regarding the crime. He testified that he drove the
carnapped vehicle and that the actual killing of
Evangelista was done by the Dominguez brothers.
Mendiola was cross-examined by the defense counsel
who manifested that the cross-examination was
only for the limited purpose of the discharge
hearing and that he was reserving his right for a
more extensive cross-examination during tho trial.
The motion to discharge was granted by the trial
court. However, in a surprise turn of events,
Mendiola was found dead before he could testify
during the trial. May Mendiola's testimony during
the discharge hearing be introduced in evidence
against the accused?

A.

Yes. S17 R119 is explicit that the testimony of the
witness during the discharge proceeding will only be
inadmissible if the court denies the motion to
discharge the accused as a state witness.''' However,
the hearing in this case had already concluded and
rNe statement of the Court that S17 R11$ is oxplicit that the testimony

of the witness during the discharge proceeding will only be inadmissible if the
court denies the motion to discharge the accused as a state witness does not
seem to be justified by the tet of the last paragraph of S17 R19 which reads
"Evidence adduced in support of the discharge shall automatically form part of
the trial, If the court denies the motion for discharge of the accused as state
witness, his sworn statement shall be inadmissible in evidence." What 2ppoars
ts that the Court had to inter the statement from the text f $17 R119

557

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the motion for discharge, approved. Thus, whatever
transpired during the hearing is already automatically
deemed part of the records of the criminal case and
admissible in evidence pursuant to the rule.
That the testimony of Mendiola was offered for
the limited purpose of qualifying him as a state
witness does not automatically render his statements
as to the specifics on the commission of the offense
inadmissible, To recall, one of the requirements under
S17 R119is to establish that tho erstwhile respondent
does not appear to be the most guilty among him and
his cohorts. Thus, it is quite understandable that, during
the discharge proceeding, Mendiola narrated in graphic
detail his entire knowledge of the crime and the extent
of the participation of each of the accused. (People v
Domfnguez, 19 February 2018, Velasco, J.).

0.

What is the effect if the accused is discharged to
be a state witness?

A.

The order discharging an accused to be a state
witness shall amount to an acquittal and shall bar
future prosecution for the same offense
Exception: Unless the accused failsor refuses

to testify against his co-accused in accordance with
his sworn statement constituting the basis for his

discharge, (S18 R119). But where the failure to testify
is not imputable to the accused but to the prosecution,
as where the prosecution did not present him as a
witness, the accused is deemed to have complied
with his undertaking for his discharge. (People v.
Mendiola, 82 Phil 740)

558

RULE 119
Trial

a.

X was charged and tried before the RTC with
qualified theft. However, after the trial and before
judgment, it became clear that the crime committed
by X was not qualified theft but estafa through
misappropriation, since the evidence showed that
he had juridical possession of the goods subject
of the charge.

a) May X be convicted of ostafa?
b)

A.

Assuming that X could not be convicted of
estafa, what procedural step would you take If
you were the prosecutor?

a) No, X may not be convicted of estafa.
It is axiomatic that an accused may be convicted

only of the offense charged or of an offense necessarily
included In the offense charged. (S4 R120). The
crime of estafa is not necessarily included in qualified
theft. Hence X may not be convicted of the same.

b)

If I were the prosecutor, the procedural step I
would take is to move for the substitution of the
information with a new one for estafa. X would
not be placed in double jeopardy since estafa is a
different offense from qualified theft.

The court shall commit X to answer for the
proper offense and dismiss the original information for
qualified theft upon the filing of a new information
charging the proper offense of estafa through
misappropriation. The court may require the witnesses to
give bail for their appearance at the trial. (S14 R110;
$19 R119).

559

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

The accused pleaded not guilty to the charge of
less serious physical injuries. Before judgment,
the fiscal moved that he be allowed to file a new
information against the accused for the graver
crime of frustrated murder it appearing that the

injuries were inflicted with intent to kill. The
defense objected upon the ground that the charge
for less serious physical injuries is included in the
offense of frustrated murder and since he had
already pleaded to the lesser charge, the filing of
a new information would constitute second jeopardy.
The prosecution replied that there would be no
double jeopardy as the complaint will be dismissed
upon the filing of the information for frustrated
murder, pursuant to S11 R149 of the 1985 Rules
on Criminal Procedure relevant to situations when
mistake has been made in charging the proper
offense. The fiscal argued that the fact of the
accused's intent to kill was discovered by the
prosecution and the complainant only during the
trial of the case.

a) Resolve the motion. Reasons.
b)

Suppose the intent to kill is Indicated In the
affidavits of the witnesses for the complainant
which were the basis for the filing of the
complaint, would your resolution be different
and if so, why? (87 Bar Q11).

A.

a) The fiscal's motion for substitution of information
should be granted.
Under S14 R110 on substitution, if it appears at
any time before judgment that a mistake has been
made in charging the proper offense, the court shall
dismiss the original information upon the filing of a
"Now $19R119

560

RULE 119
Trial
new one charging the proper offense, provided the

accused would not be placed in double jeopardy
Here there was a mistake in charging the proper
offense, which should have been frustrated murder

instead of less serious physical injuries, and the filing
of the new information would not place the accused in
double jeopardy since the graver offense arose from

facts discovered after the accused had pleaded In the

first case."°
b)

No, my resolution would be different. In that case
the motion for substitution should not be granted

since the filing of the new information would place
the accused in double jeopardy.
The reason is that the intent to kill was known all
along to the prosecution even before the accused
pleaded to the information for less serious physical
injuries. Hence it would not fall within any of the

exceptions under S7 R117, particularly S7(b).
0.

What is reverse trial in criminal cases and when may
it be resorted to? Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q5b ed)

A.

In criminal cases, reverse trial is a trial in which it is
the accused who presents his evidence ahead of the
prosecution, who may then present rebutting evidence.
It is called a reverse trial since it is the reverse of the
usual order of trial in which it is the prosecution who
first presents evidence.

'4enough $11 R119 (now $19 R119) apparently requires that in
substitution the accused cannot be convicted of the offense charged or any other
offense necessarily included therein, this provision should be read in conjunction
with S14 Rt0 which provides that substitution should not place the accused in
double [jeopardy.Hence an assiduous reading of the two provisions would lead
to the conclusion that substitution is proper even if the accused can be convicted
of the offense charged in the original information or a necessarily included
offense, provided that the accused would not be placed in double jeopardy under
the new information

561

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

In a criminal case, a reverse trial may be
resorted to if the accused admits the act or omissior
charged in the complaint or information but interposes
a lawful defense. (S11[es] R119).
The reason for conducting a reverse trial is that
the prosecution no longer needs to adduce evidence
to prove a judic al admission.
Q.

What is a demurrer to evidence?

A.

It is a motion to dismiss filed by the accused after the

prosecution has rested its case and grounded on
insufficiency of evidence, (S23 R119)
Q.

After the prosecution has rested its case, may the
court on its own initiative dismiss the case on the
ground of insufficiency of evidence?

A,

Yes, provided the court gives the prosecution an
opportunity to be heard. (S23 R119)

Q.

What is the procedure for the filing of a demurrer

to evidence?
A.
After the prosecution has rested its case, the
court shall inquire from the accused if he desires to
move for leave of court to file a demurrer to evidence,
or to proceed with the presentation of his evidence.
If the accused orally moves for leave of court to
file a demurrer to evidence, the court shall orally
resolve the same. If the motion for leave is denied, the
court shall issue an order for the accused to present and
terminate his evidence on the dates previously
scheduled and agreed upon, and to orally offer and
rest his case on the day his last witness is presented.

562

RULE 119

Trial

If despite the denial of the motion for leave, the
accused insists on filing the demurrer to evidence, the
previously scheduled dates for the accused to present
evidence snall be cancelled. (Revised Guidelines for
Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases)
Q.

Is leave of court required before the accused may
file a demurrer to evidence?

A.

No However if the demurrer to evidence was filed
without leave of court and the demurrer is denied, the
accused waives the right to present evidence and

submits the case for judgment on the basis of the
prosecution evidence. If the demurrer was filed with
leave of court and later denied, the accused may still
adduce evidence in his defense, (S23 R119) The
purpose behind this provision is to deter dilatory or
unmeritorious demurrers to evidence.
Q

You are the defense counsel of Angela Bituin who
has been charged under RA 3019 (Anti-Graft and
Corrupt Practices Act) before the Sandiganbayan.
While Angela has posted bail, she has yet to be
arraigned. Angela revealed to you that she has
not been investigated for any offense and that it
was only when police officers showed up at her
residence with a warrant of arrest that she learned
of the pending case against her. She wonders why
she has been charged before the Sandiganbayan
when she Is not In government service.
a) Xxx

b)

What "during-trial" remedy can you use to
allow an early evaluation of the prosecution
evidence without the need of presenting defense
evidence; when and how can you avail of this
remedy? (13 Bar Q7)

563

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

a) xxx

b)

The "during-trial" remedy that I can use to allow
an early evaluation of the prosecution evidence
without the presentation of defense evidence is a

demurrer to evidence an the ground of insufficiency
of evidence. I can avail of this remedy by filing a
motion for leave to file demurrer to evidence
within 5 days after the prosecution rests its case

and which motion for leave shall specifically state
its grounds. While I can file the demurrer to
evidence without leave of court, such would be
risky since if the demurrer is denied I would be

deemed to have waived the presentation of
evidence and to submit the case for judgment
based on the prosecution's evidence alone.

0.

Carlos, the accused in a theft case, filed a
demurrer to evidence without leave of court, The
court denied the demurrer to evidence and Carlos
moved to present his evidence. The court denied
Carlos' motion to present evidence and Instead
rendered judgment on the basis of the evidence
for the prosecution. Was the court correct in
preventing Carlos from presenting his evidence
and rendering judgment on the basis of the
evidence for the prosecution? Why? (01 Bar Q1)

A.

Yes the court was correct. If the demurrer to evidence
was filed without leave of court and the demurrer is

denied, the accused waives the right to present
evidence and submits the case for judgment on the
basis of the prosecution evidence.
0.

Facing a charge of murder, X filed a petition for
bail. The petition was opposed by the prosecution
but after hearing, the court granted bail to X.
On the first scheduled hearing on the merits, the
prosecution manifested that it was not adducing
564

RULE 119
Trial

additional evidence and that it was resting its
case. X filed a demurrer to evidence without leave
of court but it was denied by the court
1) Did the court have the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence under the circumstances
mentloned above?

2)

If the answer to the preceding question is in
the affirmative, can X adduce evidence in
his defense after the denlal of his demurrer
to evidence?

3)

Without further proceeding and on the sole
basis of the evidence of the prosecution,
can the court legally convict X for murder?
(98 Bar 014).

A.
1)

Yes the court had the discretion to deny the
demurrer to evidence.

It is axiomatic that an interlocutory order is not
final and conclusive and may be modified or set aside
by a trial court while it has jurisdiction over the case.

Here the order of the court granting bail and

finding that the evidence of X's guilt is not strong is an
interlocutory order which may be set aside or modified
by the trial court. Hence the trial court had the
discretion to deny the demurrer even though it had
earlier ruled that the evidence of guilt was not strong.
2)

No X can no longer adduce evidence in his
defense after the denial of his demurrer to
evidence. tf the demurrer to evidence was filed
without leave of court and the demurrer is denied,
the accused waives the right to present evidence
and submits the case for judgment on the basis of
the prosecution evidence.
565

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

3)

Q.

Yes the court can legally convict X for murder.
Under S8 R114, the evidence presented during
the ball hearing shall be considered automatically
reproduced during the trial. If the court finds that
the evidence is sufficient to prove X's guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt, then it may legally
convict X for murder.

The prosecution filed its formal offer of exhibits.
On the same day, the accused filed a motion to
dismiss on the ground of the violation of his right
to a speedy trial and on the ground that the trial
court has no evidence to consider, that the charge
had no leg to stand on, and that the prosecution
witnesses had no knowledge
the accused's
participation or connection in the crime. The trial
court treated the motion to dismiss as a demurrer,
denied the same, and deemed the accused to
have waived the right to present evidence since
he filed the motion without leave of court. Was the
action of the trial court proper?

of

A.

No. The Supreme Court held that the motion to
dismiss cannot be treated as a demurrer to evidence
since a demurrer assumes that the prosecution has
already rested its case. Here, after the prosecution
filed its formal offer of exhibits, the trial court still
needed to give the accused an opportunity to object
to the admission of those exhibits. It also needed to
rule on the formal offer. And only after such a rullnJ
could the prosecution be deemed to have rested its
case.'Since Cabador filed his motion to dismiss
before he could object to the prosecution's formal
offer, before the trial court could act on the offer, and
before the prosecution could rest its case, it could not
be said that he had intended his motion to dismiss to

the prosecution has no docurentary or object evidence to offer, then
it is deemed to have rested Its case after te presentation of its last or only witress

566

RULE 119

Trial

serve as a demurrer to evidence. The motion is
actually a motion to dismiss based on the violation of
the right to a speedy trial. The trial court was directed
to resolve the motion to dismiss. (Cabador v. People,
GR. 186001, 2 October 2009).

O.

A.

Within what time shall the accused file the demurrer
to evidence?
Within a non-extendible period of 10_calendar days

from the date leave of court is granted. The prosecution
may file a comment to the demurrer to evidence
within a similar period from its receipt. (Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases)
The revised guidelines do not explicitly provide
for the period to file a demurrer where the accused's
motion for leave is denied, but it may be inferred that
the demurrer should be filed within 10 calendar days
from the date leave of court is denied.
Q.

May the order denying the motion for leave of
court to file demurrer to evidence or the order
denying the demurrer itself be reviewed by appeal
or certiorari before judgment?

A.

No, (S23 R119). The purpose of the provision is to
prevent delay.

Q.

Distinguish a motion to quash from a demurrer to
evidence.

A,

A motion to quash is distinguished from a demurrer to
evidence (S23 R119) as follows:
AS FOR TIME TO FILE. A motion to quash should
be filed before plea while a demurrer to evidence is
filed after the prosecution has rested its case.

567

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
AS FOR GROUND/S. A motion to quash may
be filed on any of the grounds specified in S3 R117
while a demurrer to evidence is grounded on insufficiency
of evidence alone.
AS FOR LEAVE OF COURT. Leave of court is
not needed for a motion to quash while leave of court
is necessary if the accused wants to retain the right to
present evidence in case of the demurrer's denial.
Q.

Respondent was charged in the Sandiganbayan
(SB) with the violation of Sec. 3(g) of the AntiGraft Law for entering into contracts manifestly
disadvantageous to the government. Respondent
pleaded not guilty. The prosecution and the
respondents entered into stipulations during the
pre-trial. Based on these stipulations, the respondent
filed a motion to quash on the ground that "the
facts charged do not constitute an offense." The
thrust of the motion is that the respondent as a
director of the GSIS did not sign the minutes
wherein the board resolution approving the contract
was passed. The SB granted the motion to quash
and dismissed the case. The People appealed to
the Supreme Court under R45. Will the appeal
place the accused in double jeopardy?

A.

No, While the ground of the motion to quash is
ostensibly that "the facts charged do not constitute an
offense," an analysis thereof reveals that it is really
grounded on insufficiency of evidence. Insufficiency of
evidence is not a ground of a motion to quash but of a
demurrer to evidence filed after the prosecution has
rested its case. In dismissing the case based on
insufficiency of evidence before the Prosecution has
presented its evidence and rested its case, the SB
deprived the prosecution of due process. There was a

568

RULE 119
Trial

denial ot due process resulting in loss of jurisdiction.
The dismissal was void for the SB acted without or in
excess of jurisdiction. Hence the dismissal order was
void and cannot be the basis of double jeopardy.
(People v. Dumlao, G.RR. NO. 168918, 2 March 2009).
Q,

The case against the accused was dismissed
upon a demurrer to evidence filed by the accused.
Subsequently a new information charging the
same offense was flied against the accused. The
accused filed a motion to quash on the ground of
double jeopardy. The prosecution argued that
double jeopardy will not apply since the termination

of the first case was upon motion of the accused
and hence with his express consent. Is the
prosecution's argument correct?
A.

No. The dismissal of a case upon a demurrer to
evidence is equivalent to an acquittal. Hence the
prosecution cannot file anew the same charge nor
may the prosecution appeal from the order granting
the demurrer. (People v. City of Silay, G.R. No. L43790, 9 December 1976)

0.

After the prosecution had rested and made its
formal offer of evidence, with the court admitting
all of the prosecution evidence, the accused filed
a demurrer to evidence with leave of court. The
prosecution was allowed to comment thereon.
Thereafter, the court granted the demurrer, finding
that the accused could not have committed the
offense charged. If the prosecution files a motion
for reconsideration on the ground that the court
order granting the demurrer was not in accord
with the law and jurisprudence, will the motion
prosper? Explain your answer. (09 Bar Q16a)

569

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No, the motion will not prosper
The Supreme Court has held that the grant of a
demurrer to evidence is equivalent to an acquittal
upon the merits and is immediately final. (People v.
City Court of Silay, 9 Dec 1976). Hence the prosecution
cannot move for reconsideration for that would place

the accused in double jeopardy.
Q

Marvin and Shiela were accused of qualified

trafficking for prostituting three women by taking
advantage of their poverty. The prosecution presented
as witnesses the police officers who apprehended
the accused after an entrapment operation. The
police officers clearly testified as to the conduct

of the surveillance and the entrapment operation,
Their testimony was likewise corroborated by
one of the women who were being prostituted
that night.
However, the RTC granted the demurrer filed
by the accused. The RTC hinged its grant on the
following: (1) the police officers still used a
confidential informant on the actual operation
despite claiming that they conducted prior
surveillance; (2) one of the police officers seemed
unaware that Marcos Highway and Sumulong
Highway are different; (3) it was unclear from the
affidavits executed by the police officers whether
PSSupt. Guyguyon participated in the surveillance;
and (4) failure of the police officers to list in their
logbook the serial numbers of the marked money
used In the entrapment operation. May the grant
of the demurrer be set aside by certiorari?

570

i

RULE 119
Trial

A.

No. The grant of the demurrer by the RTC was
admittedly baseless. The grounds relied upon by the
RTC were immaterial to the crime charged. The fact
that the police officers still used an informant in the
conduct of the entrapment operation despite having
conducted prior surveillance is purely a law
enforcement matter - a matter of police wisdom - and

should have been best left to the discretion of the
police operatives. PO3 Lace's perceived lack of
knowledge in geography, and PSSupt. Guyguyon's
presence or absence in the prior surveillance, are
simply non-sequitur -- facts that are grossly irrelevant
on whether Marvin and Shiela committed the crime.

Likewise, taking note of the serial numbers of the
marked money is not an element of the crime charged.
Not only did the police officers clearly testify as
to the conduct of surveillance and the entrapment
operation, but their testimony was also likewise
corroborated by one of the women who were being
prostituted that night. Evidently, the prosecution was
able to establish that private respondents were engaged
In human trafficking.
Nonetheless, the judgment of acquittal is a final
verdict. Errors or irregularities which do not render the
proceedings a nullity will not defeat a plea of antrefois
acquit. The prosecution was not without the
opportunity to present its evidence. The prosecution
was not deprived of its day in court and denied due
process of law, which would have rendered the
judgment of acquittal a nullity and beyond the pale of
a claim of double jeopardy. (Raya v. People, 5 May

2021, Caguioa, .)

571

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

If the accused's demurrer was granted by the RTC
not on the ground of insufficiency of evidence but
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction (although the
RTC actually had jurisdiction), may the prosecution
appeal from the order granting the demurrer?

A.

Yes. The RTC did not decide the case on the merits,
let alone resolve the issue of petitioner's guilt or
innocence based on the evidence proffered by the
prosecution. This being the case, the RTC Order of
dismissal does not operate as an acquittal and hence,
may still be subject to ordinary appeal. (Asistio v.
People, 20 April 2015, Peralta, 4.)

Q.

What is the remedy of the prosecution from an
order of dismissal upon a demurrer to evidence?

A

A petition for certiorari under R65 is available if there
is a clear showing that the trial court, in acquitting the
accused, committed grave abuse of discretion amounting
to lack or excess of jurisdiction or a denial of due
process, thus, rendering the assailed judgment void.
Appeal is not proper since it will put the accused in
double jeopardy. (Bowden v. Bowden, 17 July 2019,
Reyes, J.).

Q.

X was charged with the crime of serious slander
by deed in the Court of First Instance of Leyte.
After the prosecution had rested its case, X's
counsel moved to dismiss the case on the ground
that the guilt of X had not been proved beyond
reasonable doubt. The trial court ordered the
dismissal of the case but on a different ground -lack of Jurisdiction, which Iha trial court legally
had, From this erroneous dismissal of the case,
the prosecution appealed to the Supreme Court.
Will the appeal prosper? Reasons. (78 Bar Q4b)

572

RULE 119
Trial

A.

No. In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that where a trial court has jurisdiction but
mistakenly dismisses the complaint or information for
lack of it, the order of dismissal is unappealable
because an appeal by the government therefrom
would place the accused in double jeopardy.

The only exception to this rule is where the
dismissal was made with the consent of the accused.
Here it cannot be said that the accused consented to
the dismissal, because his motion to dismiss after the
prosecution had rested its case was based on another
ground, that is, insufficiency of the evidence. (Based
on suggested answer of UP Law Center, citing People
• Duran, 107 Phil. 979 [1960]).'

0.

Petitioner was the private complainant in a B.P. 22
criminal case against the respondent. After the
prosecution had presented Its evidence, the
respondent filed with leave of court a denrrer to
evidence, The MeTC granted the demurrer and
dismissed the case without any finding that the
act or omission from which the civil liability may
arise did not exist. Petitioner appealed the civil
aspect of the case to the RTC, contending that the
dismissal of the criminal case should not include
its civll aspect.
The RTC held that while the evidence
presented was insufficient to prove respondent's
criminal liability, it did not altogether extinguish
his civil liability. The RTC ordered the remand of
the case to the MeTC "for further proceedings, so
that the respondent may adduce evidence on the
civil aspect of the case," The petitioner countered
-

-

'Mp the hight of the subsequent case of Asis v, People, 20 April 2015,
the answer should be that the appeal will prosper. TAke note however that the
appeal, even if on a pure question of law, should be to the Court of Appeals (Tan
v. People, 381 SCRA 74)

573

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
that the respondent waived the right to present
evidence on the civil aspect when he filed the
demurrer and also when the order of dlsmissal
was reversed by the RTC citing S1 R33. Did the

respondent waive the presentation of evidence on
the civil aspect?

A.

No. If demurrer is granted and the accused is
acquitted by the court, the accused has the right to
adduce evidence on the civil aspect of the case unless
the court also declares that the act
omission from

or

which the civil liability_may_ arise did_not exist. In such
a case the accused need not adduce evidence since
his civil liability ex delicto was also extinguished,

Here, the MeTC granted the demurrer and
dismissed the case without any finding that the act or
omission from which the civil liability may arise did not

exist. Hence the dismissal did not extinguish the
respondent's civil liability and he thus has the right to
adduce evidence on the civil aspect of the case
The petitioner's contention that the respondent
waived the right to present evidence when the order

of dismissal was reversed on appeal is untenable.
Petitioner's citation of S1 RR33 is incorrect. One of the
issues in a criminal case being the civil liability of the
accused arising from the crime, the governing law is
the Rules of Criminal Procedure, not the Rules of Civil
Procedure which pertains to a civil action arising from
the initiatory pleading that gives rise to the suit. (Hun
Hyung Park v Eung Won Choi, G.R. NO. 165496, 12
February 2007, Carpio Morales, J.)
Q.

In a 8.P. Big. 22 case, the accused without leave
of court filed a demurrer to evidence, The
demurrer was granted by the court but it held the
accused civilly liable for damages to the private

574

RULE 119
Trial

complainant. The accused argued that he should
have been allowed to present his evidence on the
civil aspect of the case. ls the accused correct?
A.

No. When petitioner filed a demurrer to evidence
without leave of court, the whole case was submitted
for judgment on the basis of the evidence presented
by the prosecution as the accused is deemed to have
waived the right to present evidence. At that juncture,
the court Is called upon to decide the case including
its civil aspect. (Alferez v. People, 31 January 2011,
Nachura, J.)

Q.

Distinguish the effects of the filing of a demurrer

to evidence in a criminal case and its filing in a
civil case. (07 Bar Q5a)
A.

In a criminal case the filing of a demurrer to evidence

results in the waiver of the accused to adduce
evidence if the filing was without leave and the same
is denied, while in a civil case the filing of a demurrer
to evidence does not need leave of count and its
denial will not result in a waiver of the defendant to
present evidence.
In a criminal case the grant of the demurrer to
evidence results in the acquittal of the accused and
hence the dismissal cannot be appealed, while in a
civil case, the grant of the demurrer to evidence may

be appealed and if on appeal the dismissal of the case
is reversed by the appellate court, the defendant ls
deemed to have waived the presentation of evidence.

575

RULE120. JUDGMENT
Q.

Define judgment in a criminal case.

A.

A judgment is the court's adjudication that the
accused is guilty or not guilty of the offense charged
and the imposition on him of the proper penalty and
civil liability, if any. (S1 R120).

Q.

What are the requisites of a Judgment?

A.

The requisites of a judgment are: (POSS)
(a) It must be written in the official language.
(b) It must be personally and directly prepared by the
judge and signed by him.
(c) It shall contain clearly and distinctly a statement
of the facts and the law upon which it is based.

(S1 R120)
Q.

What are the contents of a judgment?

A.

It the judgment is of conviction, it shall state:

(LAMP PC)
(1) The legal qualification of the offense and the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances which
attended its commission.

(2) The participation of the accused in the offense,
whether as principal, accomplice, or accessory
(3) The penalty imposed upon the accused.
(4) The civil [ability or damages to be recovered by
the offended party from the accused, if there is
any, unless the civil action to recover the civil
liability arising from the offense charged has been
reserved or waived.

576

RULE 120
Judgment

If the judgment is of acquittal, it shall state
whether the prosecution evidence absolutely failed to
prove the accused's guilt or merely failed to prove his
gult beyond reasonable doubt. In either case, the
judgment shall determine if the act or omission
from which the civil liability might arise did not exist.
(S2 R120)
Q.

Lidelia filed a complaint for estafa against
Conchita for lssuing four bouncing checks to her.
During the trial, Conchita did not deny her
Indebtedness of P33,000 to Lldelia but contended
that the checks were issued in payment of a pre-

existing obligation. The RTC rendered judgment
acquitting Conchita. In its judgment, the RTC
decreed thus:
Verily, for all said, the Court strongly believes

that in the case at bar, the prosecution, to say the
least, failed to establish the guilt of accused beyond
a reasonable doubt. That, herein, it appears that if
accused had any obligation, it is simply civil in
nature that could be properly ventilated within the
context of civil law.
WHEREFORE, In view of all the foregoing,
and considering that the prosecution failed to
establish the guilt of accused Conchita beyond a
reasonable doubt, the Court finds accused
Conchita NOT GUILTY of all the above-entitled
four (4) criminal Information and ACQUITS her
therefrom, with costs de oficio.

Lldelia filed a motion for reconsideration
praying that the portion of the decision regarding
the civil liability of the accused be reconsidered
and thereafter the accused who had admitted her
civil liability be ordered to pay the sum of P33,000.
Lidelia's motion for reconsideration was denied,
577

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the trial court stating that since Conchita was
acquitted, it could not award civil damages. May
Lidelia avail of mandamus to compel the trial court
to award her civil damages?

A.

Yes. If an accused is acquitted, it does not necessarily
follow that no civil liability arising from the acts
complained of may be awarded in the same judgment.
The

prevailing

rule

as

enunciated

by the

Supreme Court en banc in the case of Padilla v. Court

of Appeals (129 SCRA 558) is that the Court may
acquit an accused on reasonable doubt and still order

the payment of civil damages already proved in the
same case without need for a separate civil action
(Maximo v. Gerochi, G.R. No, 47994, 24 September
1986, e.b.). The duty of the criminal court, in case of
acquittal, to determine if the act or omission from
which the civil liability might arise exists is a duty which
may be compelled by mandamus. (2 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 365366 [6"rev. ed., 1989]).
Q.

Rimando issued 3 postdated check to the Sps.
Aldaba to accommodate their investment in Multitel
Corporation. The checks bounced for insufficiency
of funds. Rimando was prosecuted for the
violation of B.P. Blg. 22 and for estafa under
Article 315(2)(d) of the Revised Penal Code.
Rimando was acquitted in the BP 22 cases on the
ground of reasonable doubt, with a declaration
that the act or omission from which liability may
arise does not exist. Later Rimando was acquitted
also in the estafa case but with the pronouncement
that he was civilly liable to the Spouses Rimando
for the value of the postdated checks. On appeal,
Rimando contended that her acquittal and

578

RULE 120
Judgment

exoneration from the civil liability in the BP 22
cases should have barred Sps. Aldaba from
claiming civil liability from her in the estafa case.

ls Rimando's contention correct?
A.

No Rimando's acquittal and subsequent exoneration
in the BP 22 cases had no effect in the estafa case,
even If both cases were founded on the same factual

circumstances.

While a BP 22 case and an estafa

case may be rooted from an identical set of facts, they

nevertheless present different causes of action,
which, under the law, are considered "separate,
distinct, and independent" from each other. Therefore,

both cases can proceed to their final adjudication both as to their criminal and civil aspects -subject to
the prohibition on double recovery. Perforce, a ruling
in a BP 22 case concerning the criminal and civil
liabilities of the accused cannot be given any bearing
whatsoever in the criminal and civil aspects of a

related estafa case, (Rimando v. Aldaba, 13 October
2014, Perlas-Bernabe, ,J.).
Q.

How is a judgment promulgated?

A.

The judgment is promulgated by reading it in the
presence of the accused and of any judge of the court
in which it was rendered. (S6 R120). Hence the
judgment may be promulgated by a judge who did not
write the decision provided that he is a judge of the
court in which judgment was rendered.

Q.

What is the exception to the rule that the judgment
shall be promulgated by reading it in the presence
of the accused and the judge?

A.

If the conviction is for a light offense, the judgment
may be pronounced in the presence of the accused's
counsel or representative.

579

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

When the judge is absent, the judgment may be
promulgated by the clerk of court. (S6 R120)

Q.

How is the judgment promulgated if the accused
is confined or detained in another province or city?

A.

If the accused is confined or detained in another
province or city, the judgment may be promulgated by

the executive judge of the RTC having jurisdiction
over the place of confinement or detention upon
request of the court which rendered the judgment.
The court promulgating the judgment shall have

authority to accept the notice of appeal and to
approve the bail bond pending appeal. However if the
decision of the trial court convicting the accused
changed the nature of the offense from non-bailable

to bailable, the application for bail can only be filed
and resolved by the appellate court. (S6 R120).
Q.

How is notice of the promulgation given to the
accused?

A.

The proper clerk of court shall give notice to the
accused personally or through his bondsman or
warden and counsel, requiring him to be present at
the promulgation of the decision, If the accused was
tried in absentia because he jumped bail or escaped
from prison, the notice shall be served at his last
known address (S6 R120).

Q.

A.

How should the judgment be promulgated if the
accused fails to appear at the scheduled date of
promulgation despite notice?
The promulgation shall be made by recording the

judgment in the criminal docket and serving the
accused a copy thereof at his last known address or

through his counsel,

580

RULE 120
Judgment

If the judgment is for conviction and the failure of
the accused to appear was without justifiable cause,
he shall lose the remedies available under the Rules
of Court (e.g., appeal, certiorari) and the court shall
order his arrest. (S6 R120),
Q.

What is the recourse of the accused who has lost
his remedies for failure to appear during the

promulgation of the judgment of conviction?
A.

Within 15 days from promulgation of iudument, the

accused may surrender and file a motion for leave of

court to avail of the remedies under the Rules of
Court. He shall state the reasons for his absence at
the scheduled promulgation and If he proves that his

absence was for a 'gstifiable cause, he shall be
allowed to avail of said remedies within 15 days from
notice. (S6 R120).
Q.

A, B, C, and D were convicted of murder by the
RTC. Only D personally appeared during the
promulgation of the judgment. Subsequently without
surrendering and explaining the reasons for their
absence, A, B, and C joined D in their joint motion
for reconsideration, The RTC took cognizance of
the joint motion for reconsideration and later
issued an order acquitting A and B and downgrading
the conviction of C and D from murder to
homicide. The People filed a special civil action
for certiorari with the Court of Appeals to annul
the order. A, B, C, and D argued that the petition
for certiorari would place them In double jeopardy.
Was their argument correct?

A.

A, B, and C's argument was not correct
Under S6 R120, the accused who fails to appear
without justifiable cause during the promulgation shall
lose the remedies available in the Rules of Court

581

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

against the judgment and the court shall order his
arrest. However within 15 days from promulgation of
the judgment, the accused may surrender and file a
motion for leave of court to avail of these remedies.
Here the RTC clearly exceeded its Jurisdiction
when it not only failed to cause the arrest of A, B, and
C who were at large but also took cognizance of their
joint motion despite the fact that they did not
surrender and file a motion for leave of court to avail
of remedies. Hence A, B, and C were not placed in
double jeopardy because the RTC acted without
jurisdiction and thus its order was void.
However O is correct in his argument that the
petition for certiorari would place him in double
jeopardy. He was in custody and present at the
promulgation of the Judgment. Hence the RTC never
lost Jurisdiction over his person and thus the RTC's
ruling downgrading his conviction from murder to
homicide stands. (People v. De Grano, GR. No.
167710, 5 June 2009).
Q.

The petitioner and his wife Marinel Salvador were
charged in the RTC with estafa under Article 315
of the Revised Penal Code. On 30 March 2011, the
date scheduled for the promulgation of the judgment,
their counsel moved for the deferment of the
promulgation inasmuch as the petitioner was
allegedly suffering from hypertension. Unconvinced
of the reason, the RTC proceeded to promulgate
its decision convicting the Petitioner and his wife
and sentencing them to imprisonment of 4 years
and two months of prision correctional to 20
years of reclusion temporal.

582

RULE 120
Judgment

The RTC then issued a warrant for the
petitioner's arrest. He was apprehended on 7 April
2011, or eight days from the promulgation of the
judgment finding him guilty. The petitioner filed
his Motion for Leave to file Notice of Appeal dated
13 April 2011, and attached thereto the medical
certificate dated 30 March 2011 purportedly
Issued by Dr. Paulo Miguel A, David, certifying
that the petitioner had submitted himself to a
medical consultation at the Rizal Medical Center
on 30 March 2011 and had been found to be
suffering from hypertension. The prosecution
opposed the motion attaching the affidavit of Dr,
David stating that he never examined the petitioner
and that he never issued the medical certificate
dated 30 March 2011, The RTC nonetheless
granted Petitioner's motion and gave due course
to the Petitioner's appeal. The Respondent, who
was the offended party, filed a petition for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals to set aside
the RTC's order granting Petitioner's motion for
leave to file notice of appeal. The Petitioner
argues that the Respondent has no legal standing
to assail the RTC's order as it is only the Office of
the Solicitor General who can represent the
People in proceedings before the CA and the SC.
Did the Respondent have legal standing to assail
the RTC's order?
A.

Yes. The Court has stressed that the People of the
Philippines, being the real party in interest in every
criminal proceedings, can be represented only by the
0SG in criminal proceedings in the CA or in the SC
Yet, this rule admits of exceptions. A special civil
action for certiorari may be filed by an aggrieved party
alleging grave abuse of discretion amounting to

583

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

excess or lack of Jurisdiction on the part of the trial
court. The term "aggrieved parties" includes the State
and the private offended party or complainant
There was grave abuse of discretion on the part

of the RTC since its order giving due course to
Petitioner's appeal was in clear violation of S6 R120

which requires that the accused's failure to appeal
during the promulgation was with justifiable cause and
that the accused should prove such justifiable cause.
Here the certification purportedly issued by Dr. David
was proved to be spurious. (Salvador v. Chua, 15
July 2015, Bersamin, 4,).°

O.

Upon a tip from a confidential informant (CI), the
police officers together with the CI proceeded to
conduct a buy-bust operation in which one of the
police officers acted as the poseur·buyer, The
police team arrested the accused after he was
caught In flagrante selling to the police officers.
During the trial the accused filed with leave of
court a demurrer to evidence. The judge granted
the demurrer to evidence on the reasoning that
the prosecution's failure to present the testimony
of the CI was fatal to Its case since the Cl's
testimony is indispensable, The prosecution went
up to the SC on a petition for certiorari under R65
seeking to set aside the judge's order granting the
demurrer. The accused argued that the petition
should be dismissed on the ground of double
jeopardy. May the petition for certiorari be granted?

re

Supreme Court also said that the accused did not fufit the
requirement of surrendering himself. (The accused was arrested eight days after
the promulgation). It ls submitted that even if the accused did not surrender but
was arrested, he may still avail of the remedies If he files a motion for leave and
he proves that his absenoe during the promulgation was for a justifiable cause

584

RULE 120
Judgment

A.

Yes. There is no double jeopardy since the order
granting the demurrer was made with grave abuse of
discretion amounting to lack of or excess of
jurisdiction It is settled that the testimony of an
informant is not indispensable if there is other
independent evidence proving the guilt of the acused.
Here lhe other police officers had personal knowledge
of the accused's guilt as they were the ones who
caught the accused in flagrante. The SC ordered the
remand of the case to the trial court for reception of
the defense evidence. (People v. Judge Lagos, 6
March 2013, Sereno, C.J.)

Q.

The accused Sevilla was charged with falsification
of public document under Art. 171(4) of the
Revised Penal Code. The prosecution alleged that
on the first day of his term as councilor of the City
of Malabon, Sevilla made a false narration in his
Personal Data Sheet (PDS) to wit: that in answer
to the question of whether there is a pending
criminal case against him, Sevilla marked the box
corresponding to the "no" answer despite the
pendency of a criminal case against him for
assault upon an agent of a person in authority
before the Metropolitan Trial Court of Malabon
City, Branch 55. The Sandiganbayan found that
accused could not be convicted of falsification of
public document since he did not act with malicious
intent to falsify the entry because the PDS was
actually prepared by his staff and he signed
without verifying the entries therein. Nonetheless he
was convicted of reckless imprudence resulting
to falsification of public document under Article
365 of the RPC considering that Sevilla's PDS was
haphazardly and recklessly done, which resulted
in the false entry therein. Was the accused's
conviction proper?

585

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

Yes. In case of variance between the allegation and
proof, a defendant may be convicted of the offense
proved when the offense charged Is included in or
necessarily includes the offense proved. There is no
dispute that a variance exists between the offense
alleged against Sevilla and that proved by the
prosecution -- the Information charged him with the
intentional felony of falsification of public document
under Article 171(4) of the RPC while the prosecution
was able to prove reckless imprudence resulting to
falsification of public documents. Parenthetically, the
question that has to be resolved then is whether
reckless imprudence resulting to falsification of public
document is necessarily included in the intentional
felony of falsification of public document under Article
171(4) of the RPC. The answer is in the affirmative
(Sevilla v. People, 13 August 2014)

Q.

Accused, a reglonal director of the Department of
Agriculture, was charged with falsification of
public document under Article 171 of the Revised
Penal Code, committed by falsifying his post-travel
report submitted in order to liquidate his cash
advances. The Sandiganbayan convicted him of
falsification of private document under Article
172(2), committed by altering his PAL ticket. On
appeal, accused raised only two arguments: that
he was not the one who altered the plane ticket
and that he had no intent to cause damage.
May his conviction be set aside on the ground
that he could not be convicted of falsification of
private document since that would violate his
constitutional right to be informed of the nature
and the cause of the accusation?

586

RULE 120
Judgment

A

Yes. An appeal in a criminal case opens the whole
matter for the review of any question, including those
questions not raised by the parties. In this case, a
review is necessary because the conviction was made
in violation of the accused's constitutional rights.
Convicting the accused of falsification of private
document under Article 172(2) of the RPC would
violate the accused's right to be informed of the
charge against him since the offense charged and the
offense for which he was convicted are clearly
different." (Malabanan v. Sandiganbayan, 2 August
2017, Sereno, C.J.)

0.

Accused was charged in an information with rape
through sexual intercourse committed against a
15-year-old minor, The information alleged that
the accused with lewd design had sexual
intercourse with the 15-year-old minor through
force and intimidation contrary to Article 266.-A, in
relation to Article 266-B, of the Revised Penal Code.
During the trial, the victim testified that the
accused inserted his finger into her vagina. The
RTC convicted the accused of rape by sexual
assault since instead of a penile penetration there
was a digital penetration of the victim's private
part. On appeal, the Court of Appeals ordered the
remand of the case to the RTC. The CA held that
although the accused was clearly guilty of rape by
sexual assault, what the trial court should have
done was to direct the state prosecutor to file a

re Supreme Court stated that the proper charge to consider was tho

crime penalized under Article 1712) since a plane ticket ls a commercial
document, The Count however stated that the accused could not be convicted
thereof since there was no mans tea, the accused altering the plane ticket to
make It consistent with the deterred date of his re-scheduled travel

587

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEOIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

new information charging the proper offense, and

after compliance therewith, to dismiss the original
information in accordance with the last paragraph
of 514 R110 and S19 R119.
a) Was the CA's order to remand the case
correct?

b)

A.

May the CA convict the accused instead of
rape by sexual assault based on the variance
doctrine?

a) No. The last paragraph of S14 R110 and S19
R119 are applicable only before judgment has been
rendered. When the judgment was reviewed by the
CA, the RTC had already rendered a judgment of
conviction.
b)

No. The variance doctrine allows the conviction of

an accused for a crime proved which is different
from but necessarily included in the crime charged.
Rape by sexual assault is not necessarily included
or subsumed in rape through sexual intercourse.
The accused may however be convicted of
lascivious conduct against a child under Sec. 5(b)
of RA. No. 7610, which offense is necessarily
included in the offense charged.(People v Caoili,
8 August 2017, e.b., Tijam, J.).
Q.

Petitioner town mayor issued extraction permits
to quarry operators when it was the provincial
governor who had the authorlty to issue such
permits. Petitioner was charged with the violation
of Section 3(e) of RA 3019 under an information
alleging that petitioner taking advantage of his
official position, did then and there willfully and
with evident bad faith give unwarranted benefits
to a private party by issuing them extraction
permits without legal authority. On appeal, the
588

RULE 120
Judgment

Supreme Court found that the petitioner did not
act with evident bad faith in issuing the oxtraction
permits because of his honest belief that as mayor
he was authorized to issue the permits under the

Local Government Code. May the accused be
convicted of the violation of Section 3(e) of RA
3019 through gross inexcusable negligence?
A.

No. It would be unconstitutional to convict petitioner
on the basis of gross inexcusable negligence. The
information filed against petitioner accuse the latter of
violating Section 3(e) of RA 3019 through the modality
of evident bad faith only. The information did not

accuse petitioner of violating the same provision
through gross inexcusable negligence. Evident bad
faith and gross inexcusable negligence are two of the
three modalities of committing violations of Section
3(e) of RA 3019. Each modality of violating Section 3(e)
of RA 3019 is distinct from the others. Hence, while all
three modalities may be alleged simultaneously in a
single information for violation of Section 3(e) of RA
3019, an allegation of only one modality without

mention of the others necessarily means the
exclusion of those not mentioned. An accusation
for a violation of Section 3(e) of RA 3019 committed
through evident bad faith only, cannot be considered
as synonymous to, or includes an accusation of
violation of Section 3(e) of RA 3019 committed
through gross inexcusable negligence. (Villarosa v.
People, 23 June 2020, e.b., Peralta, C.J.)
Q.

May an accused charged with the sale of marijuana

be convicted of the possesslon of marijuana?
A.

Yes. The crime of illegal sale included or absorbed
the crime of illegal possession. The rule is that when
there is a variance between the offense charged in
the complaint or information, and that proved or
established by the evidence, and the offense as
589

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
charged necessarily includes the offense proved, the
accused shall be convicted of the offense proved
included in that which is charged. (S4 R120; People v.
Manansala, 3 April 2013, Bersamin,J.).
Q.

May an accused charged with transporting illegal
drugs be convicted of possession thereof?

A.

Yes, transporting illegal drugs necessarily includes
possession thereof. (Musa v. People, 25 September
2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

Q.

Accused was charged with estafa through
misappropriation under an information alleging
that as school principal, accused was authorized
to collect tuition fees from students, that she
collected such tuition fees but failed to remit the
same to the school and to return such fees
despite demands. The RTC convicted the accused
of estafa through misappropriation, The Court of
Appeals held that the accused was not liable for
estafa through misappropriation because she
had only the material possession of the funds.
May the accused nevertheless be convicted of
qualified theft?

A.

Yes, While the accused cannot be convicted of estafa
through misappropriation because she had only
material possession of the funds, nevertheless, a
reading of the information and an appreciation of the
evidence show qualified theft. Applying the variance
doctrine under S4 in relation to S5 R120, it is proper
to hold petitioner guilty of qualified theft because the
latter crime was necessarily included in the crime
charged in the information. Grave abuse of confidence is
present because as principal she was authorized to
collect tuition fees. Such position or relation of trust

590

RULE 120
Judgment

and confidence was aptly established to have been
gravely abused when she failed to remit the entrusted
amount of collection to the school. (Reside v. People,
28 July 2020, Reyes. J.).
Q.

When does a judgment of conviction become final?

A.

Ajudgment of conviction becomes final: (PAWS)
(a) After the lapse of the period to appeal
(b) Partial or total service of the sentence,
(c) Waiver in writing of the right to appeal
(d) Accused has applied for probation. (S7 R120)

Q.

Petitioner was found gullty of homicide and
sentenced to imprisonment of 12 years, 1 month
and 1 day to 20 years and to pay the heirs of the
victim P32,000 for funeral expenses and P30,000
as death indemnity. The judgment becamo final
and executory in 1989. Almost two decades passed
from the entry of judgment, in 2009, private
respondent, claiming to be the son of the
deceased victim, filed a Motion for Execution of
Judgment. He alleged, among others, that despite
his request to the City Prosecutor to file a motion
for execution, the judgment has not been
enforced because said prosecutor has not acted
upon his request. The Petitioner opposed the
motion contending that the judgment can no
longer be enforced pursuant to 56 R39. Should
the RTC grant the motion for execution?

A.

With respect to the penalty of imprisonment, the
judgment may be enforced. The applicable provision
is not S6 R39 but Article 93 of the Revised Penal
Code. Pursuant to Article 93, the period of prescription
of the penalty did not start to run since the Petitioner

591

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
did not evade the service of his sentence by escaping

from

imprisonment.

Since the

penalty had

not

prescribed, the same may be enforced by arresting

the Petitioner to serve his sentence.
With respect however to the civil liability, the
judgment may no longer be enforced. The civil liability
arising from the offense has prescribed pursuant to
Article 1144(3) of the Civil Code, in relation to S6 R39.
(Basilonia v. Villaruz, 10 August 2015, Peralta, J.).
Q.

In Criminal Case No. 28293, the Sandiganbayan
found petitioner Escobar guilty of malversation.
The Sandiganbayan held that petitioners Escobar,
Telesforo, and Cagang approved the disbursement
voucher despite the fact that it lacked the
documentation required under COA Circular No,
96-003 dated February 27, 1996.
The petitioner argued that he could no longer
be convicted of malversation since the Sandiganbayan
in Criminal Case No. 28331, which arose from the

same COA Audit Report and Ombudsman
Resolution dated August 11, 2004, had relied on
the testimonies of Gadlan and Calling and held
that petitioner Escobar ls not an accountable
officer for purposes of Article 217 of the Revised
Penal Code, Hence under the principle of
conclusiveness of judgment, the issue of whether
the petitioner was an accountable officer could no
longer be relitigated in a subsequent case, ls the
petitioner correct?
A.

No. Except with respect to civil cases impliedly
instituted, res judicata is not applicable in criminal
proceedings. This Court has expressly stated this rule
multiple times. At most, the applicable concept of res
judicata is that of res judicata in prison grey as double
jeopardy which is not in question here.

592

RULE 120
Judgment

The argument that conclusiveness of judgment
bars this case considering that the Saniganbayan
already found that Escobar is not an accountable
officer, which was an error of law in tight of Zoleta v.
Sandiganbayan, will lead to an absurd effect. Once a
person has been acquitted of a crime, despite the
ground being a question of law resolved erroneously,
once that decision is final, that person can commit the

exact same crime against the same party with
impunity, under the claim that even where the subject
matter differs, the erroneous application of the law is
forever binding on those parties. Thus, this argument

cannot be countenanced. (Escobar v, People, 20
November 2017, Leonen, 4).MR

Mg perusal of the facts ats shows that there can be no conclusiveness

of uogment since there is no identity of sup/ect matter between tne two
Sandiganbayan cases, which identity is a requisite for the application of the
principle of concisiveness of judgment. Although the two cases were tackled in
the same COA report, they involved different amounts, different transactions, and

dfterent checks

593

RULE 121. NEW TRIAL OR
RECONSIDERATION
Q.

When may the court grant a
reconsideration?

new trial or

A.

At any time before a judgment of conviction becomes
final, the court may, on motion of the accused or at its

own instance but with the consent of the accused,
grant a new trial or reconsideration, (S1 R121)

Q

May the prosecution move for the reconsideration
of a judgment of conviction?

A.

No. Under S1 R121 only the accused may move for
such a reconsideration. The reason is that the
accused would be placed in double jeopardy. It is
submitted however that a motion for reconsideration
is proper if the prosecution is going to challenge the
judgment of conviction on the ground that it was
issued with grave abuse of discretion amounting to
lack of or excess of jurisdiction.

Q.

What are the grounds for a new trial?

A,

The court shall grant a new trial on any of the
following grounds: (PN)

(a) PREJUDICIAL ERRORS OR IRREGULARITIES.
Errors of law or irregularities prejudicial to the
substantial rights of the accused have been
committed during the trial.
(b) NEWLY DISCOVERED EVIDENCE. New and
material evidence has been discovered which the
accuse could not with reasonable diligence have
discovered and produced at the trial and which if
introduced and admitted would probably change
the judgment. (S2 R121)

594

RULE 121
New Trial or Reconsideration

Q.

What are the grounds for reconsideration?

A.

The court shall grant reconsideration on the ground of

errors of law or fact in the judgment, which do not
require further proceedings. (S3 R121).
Q.

What are the requisites before a new trial may be
granted on the ground of newly discovered
evidence? (DCWAN)

A,

The requisites are:
(a) The newly discovered evidence could not with
reasonable diligence have been discovered and
produced at the trial.
(b) If introduced and admitted, such evidence would
probably change the judgment.

(c) The motion for new trial shall be In writing and
shall state the grounds on which it is based.
(d) The motion must be supported by affidavits of
witnesses by whom such evidence is expected to
be given or by duly authenticated copies of
documents which are proposed to be introduced

in evidence.
(e)

Notice of the motion shall be given to the
prosecutor. (S2 & 4, R121)

Q.

What are the effects of granting a new trial or
reconsideration?

A.

The effects of granting a new trial or reconsideration
are the following:
(a)

When a new trial is granted on the ground of
treiudicial errors or_irregularities, all the proceedings
and evidence affected thereby shall be set aside
and taken anew (sata). The court may in the

595

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

interest of justice allow

the

introduction of

additional evidence. Note that it is not the entire
proceedings and evidence but only those affected
which shall be set aside.

(b) When a new trial is granted on the ground of
newly discovered evidence, the evidence already
adduced shall stand and the newly discovered
and such other evidence as the court may in the
interest of justice allow to be introduced shall be
taken and considered together with the evidence
already in the record.

(c) In all cases when the court grants new trial or
reconsideration, the original judgment shall be set
aside or vacated and a new judgment rendered

accordingly. (S6 R121)

596

RULE 122. APPEAL
Q.

What are the effects of an appeal from a judgment
of conviction?

A.

The following are the effects of an appeal from a
judgment of conviction:
(a) Upon perfection of the appeal, the execution_of
the judgment or final order shall be stared as to
the appealing party. (S11[c] R122). There is no

motion for execution pending appeal of a
judgment of conviction. Note however that the
execution of a judgment or final order of indirect

contempt shall not be suspended by an appeal
unless the person adjudged in contempt files a
bond. (S11 R71)
(b) The appeal throws open the entire case for review
and this includes the penalty which may be
increased. The appeal is a review de novo and is
not limited to the assigned errors. (People v. De
Leon, 356 SCRA 471 ). Compare with the rule in
civil cases in which the appellate court can
consider only those questions of fact or law which
were raised below and which were assigned as
errors on appeal (S15 R44)
Q.

To what court may an appeal be taken?

A.

An appeal may be taken as follows:
(a) To the RTC in cases decided by the MTC
(b) To the Court of Appeals in cases decided by the RTC

597

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(c) To the Supreme Court in cases decided by the Court
of Appeals, the Sandiganbayan, and the Court of
Tax Appeals en banc. (S2 R122, S1[b] Rule X
Revised Internal Rules of the Sandiganbayan, $19
CTA Act)
Q.

How is an appeal taken?

A.

(a) The appeal to the RTC or to the Court of Appeals
in cases decided by the RTC in the exercise of its
original jurisdiction shall be by notice of appeal filed
with the court which rendered the judgment or final

order appealed from and by serving a copy of the
notice of appeal upon the adverse party.

(b) The appeal to the CA in cases decided by the
RTC in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
shall be by petition for review under R42
(c) The appeal in cases where the penalty imposed by
the RTC is reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment
or where a lesser penalty is imposed but for
offenses committed on the same occasion or

which arose out of the same occurrence that
gave rise to the more serious offense for which
the penalty of death, reclusion perpetua, or life
imprisonment is imposed (coso asog), shall be by
notice of aveal to the CA in accordance with
S3(a) R122.
(d) No notice of appeal is necessary in cases where
the RTC imposed the death penalty. The CA
shall automatically review the judgment.
(e)

Except where the penalty of reclusion perpetua

or life imprisonment is imposed, an appeal to the
SC shall be by petition for review on certiorari
under R45

598

RULE 122
Appeal

Q.

The accused was convicted of a crime by the
RTC. The accused appealed the judgment to the
Court of Appeals by filing a notice of appeal. His
appeal raised only questions of law. The CA
dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction,

stating that the appeal should have been brought
to the Supreme Court since it raises only questions
of law. Old the CA act correctly In dismissing
the appeal?

A.

No. An appeal on pure questions of law from a
judgment of the RTC in a criminal case may be taken
to the Court of Appeals by way of a notice of appeal.
S3(a) R122 provides that "the appeal to the Regional
Trial Court, or to the Court of Appeals in cases
decided by the Regional Trial Court in the exercise of
its original jurisdiction, shall be by notice of appeal."
Neither the Constitution nor the Rules of Criminal
Procedure exclusively vests in the Supreme Court the
power to hear cases on appeal in which only an error

of law is involved. (Tan v. People, 381 SCRA 74
(2002], e.b., Vitug, .),°

Q.

How Is an appeal taken from a judgment of the
Sandlganbayan In a criminal case?

A.

An appeal from a Sandiganbayan judgment in a
criminal case rendered in the exercise of its original
jurisdiction is taken to the Supreme Court by filing a
notice of appeal, (People v, Talaue, 12 January 2021,
Peralta, C.J.).

y, effect, the Court provided for concurrent appellate / isdiction
betweer the CA and the SC over appeals from criminal cases whicn raise only
questions of law. In his dissent, Justice Vicente V. Mendoza states that the Court
should have applied Section 17 of the Judiciary Act of 1948 which vests
exolusve jurisdiction to the SC cver such appeals

599

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

If such judgment was rendered in the exercise of
its appellate jurisdiction, the appeal is taken to the
Supreme Court by filing a petition for review on
certiorari under R45. (2018 Revised Internal Rules of
the Sandiganbayan).
Q.

What is the remedy ot an aggrieved party in a
criminal case from the trial court's order granting
a motion to withdraw information?

A.

Appeal. Such an order is a final order which is
eppealable pursuant to S1 R122. (Personal Direct Selling
v. Carandang, 8 November 2017, Leonen, J,).°

Q.

Quilesete was convicted by the RTC of
Malversation. Aggrieved, Quileste appealed to the
CA. However the CA dismissed outright the appeal

because Quileste failed to furnish the 0SG a copy
of his Motion for Extension to File Appellant's
Brief and his Appellant's Brief in violation of S3
R124. Quilesete's motion for reconsideration was
denied. Was the outright dismissal of the appeal
warranted ?
A.

Yes. This case involves malversation of public funds,
punishable under Article 217 of the Revised Penal
Code, committed by a low-ranking public officer (with
salary grade below SG 27) Thus the case was
correctly filed with, and tried by, the RTC, the court
that has exclusive original jurisdiction over the case.
Upon Quileste's conviction by the RTC, his remedy
should have been an appeal to the Sandiganbayan,
pursuant to PD No. 1606, as amended by Republic
Act (R.A.) N. 7975 and R.A. No. 8249, specifically
Section 4 thereof. (Quilesete v, People, 18 February
2009, Nachura, J.).

Necessarily. the appeal would be brought by the offended party. t is
submitted that the appeal may oe availed of by the offended party only f there
was grave abuse of discretion pr if the appeal is limited to the civil aspect ot the case

600

RULE 122
Appeal

0.

Accused was charged and convicted by the
RTC of Malversation of Public Funds through
Falsification of Public Documents. Accused filed
a notice of appeal with the RTC which erroneously
elevated the records to the CA rather than the
Sandiganbayan (SB) Accused filed three motions
for extension to file appeal brief. When he noticed
the error in the appeal, he filed a motion to endorse
the appeal to the SB. The motion was denied by
the CA. Should the motion to endorse the appeal
to the SB have been granted?

A.

Yes. The petitioner is a low-ranking public officer
having a salary grade below 27, whose appeal from
the RTC's ruling convicting him of six (6) counts of
Malversation of Public Funds Through Falsification of
Public Documents falls within the appellate jurisdiction
of the SB. Thus, since petitioner's case properly falls
within the appellate jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan,
his appeal was erroneously taken to the CA,
This notwithstanding, the error ls not primarily
attributable to petitioner, since the duty to transmit the
records to the proper court devolves upon the RTC.
Notably, petitioner did not specify that his appeal
be taken to the CA, This was precisely because it was
not even his duty to designate to which court his
appeal should be taken. Case law states that "[ijn the

notice of appeal[,] it is not even required that the
appellant Indicate the court to which its appeal is
being interposed. The requirement is merely directory
and failure to comply with it or error in the court
indicated is not fatal to the appeal", as it should be in
this case. (Dizon v. People, 24 January 2018, PerlasBernabe. J.).

601

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

B, C, 0 and E were convicted by the RTC. B
appealed but C, D, and E did not. Wit the appeal
of B affect c, 0, and E?

A.

No except insofar as the judgment of the appellate
court is favorable and applicable to C, D, and E.
(S11[a] R122).

0.

B, C, D and E were convicted of murder by the
RTC. The RTC relied principally and heavily on the

testimony of X, the lone eyewitness, Only B
appealed and C, D, and E served sentence. On
appeal to the SC, the latter reversed the RTC'S
judgment finding that the testimony of X bereft of
any credence. Will the acquittal of B also result in
the acquittal of C, 0, and E?
A.

Yes. An appeal taken by one or more of several
accused shall not affect those who did not appeal,
except insofar as the judgment of the appellate court
is favorable and applicable to the latter. Here the SC
judgment finding X's testimony bereft of credence is
favorable and applicable to C, D, and E since their
conviction was also anchored on X's testimony. (People
v. Webb, G.R. NO. 176864, 14 December 2010)

Q.

Crispian and Derek were charged with the sale of
illegal drugs. The information charged them with
selling the same sachet of shabu. Both were
convicted but only Crispian appealed. The SC
acquitted Crispian because of the failure of the
police officers to comply with the chain of
custody rule. Will Crispian's acquittal likewise
result in the acquittal of Derek?

A.

Yes. $11(a) R122 states that "[a]n appeal taken by
one or more of several accused shall not affect those
who did not appeal, except insofar as the judgment of
the appellate court is favorable and applicable to the latter."

602

RULE 122
Appeal

Here Derek was charged in Criminal Case No.
21618 for the alleged illegal sale of sachet of shabu
is the same sachet for which Crispian was charged
also in Criminal Case No. 21618, and hence, part of
the seized items whose integrity and evidentiary value
had been compromised. (People v. Lumaya, 7 March
2018, Perlas-Bemabe, J.).
Q.

A, B, C, and D were convicted by the RTC of
homicide for the killing of X. C and D appealed to
the Court of Appeals which found them guilty of
murder Instead, on a finding that all of the
accused employed treachery. May A and B be
found guilty of murder also?

A.

No. An appeal taken by one or more of several
accused shall not affect those who did not appeal,
except insofar as the judgment of the appellate court
is favorable and applicable to the latter. (S11[a]
R122)

Here while the judgment of the CA may be
applicable to A and B, it is not favorable to them
Q,

In an Information charging them of Murder,
policemen A, B, and C were convicted of Homicide.
A appealed from the decision but B and C did not.
B started serving his sentence but C escaped and
is at large. In the Court of Appeals, A applied for
bail but was denied. Finally the Court of Appeals
rendered a decision acquitting A on the ground
that the evidence pointed to the NPA as the killers
of the victim.
1)

xxx

2) Can B and C be benefited by the decision of
the Court of Appeals? (98 Bar 013)

603

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

A.

2) Yes B and C can be benefited by the decision of
the Court of Appeals. An appeal taken by one or more
of several accused shall not affect those who did not
appeal, except insofar as the judgment of the
appellate court is favorable and applicable to the
latter. (S11[a] R122). Here the judgment of the Court
of Appeals is favorable and applicable to B and C
because the court found that it was not them but the
NPA who killed the victim.
While C's escape resulted in the dismissal of his
appeal (S8 R124), It did not preclude the application
of S11(a) R122 since the provision applies even to
one who did not appeal.

Q.

PO2 Eduardo Valdez and his brother Edwin
Valdez were charged with three counts of murder
of the Sayson brothers. The information In each
count reads as follows:
That on or about the 1 day of March, 2000, in
Quezon City, Philippines, the above-named accused

conspiring together, confederating with and
mutually helping each other, with intent to kill,
qualified with treachery, did, then and there, willfully,
unlawfully and feloniously, assault, attack and
employ personal violence upon the person of one
FERDINAND SAYSON Y DABOCOL by then and

there shooting him with a gun, hitting him on his
head, thereby Inflicting upon him serious and
mortal wound which was the direct and immediate
cause of his death, to the damage and prejudice
of the heirs of the sald FERDINAND SAYSON Y

DABOCOL [etc.].

The Valdez brothers were convicted of murder
by the RTC which conviction was affirmed by the
CA. The brothers appealed to the SC but
604

RULE 122
Appeal

subsequently Edwin withdrew his appeal which
withdrawal was approved by the SC.
a) May the conviction of Eduardo for murder be
reduced to one for homicide?
b) Assuming that Eduardo's conviction for murder
may be reduced to homicide, should Edwin's
conviction be likewise reduced to homicide?
A.

a) Yes Eduardo's conviction for murder may be
reduced to one for homicide.

The State must specifically aver the factual
circumstances or particular acts that constitute the
criminal conduct or that qualify or aggravate the
liability for the crime In the interest of affording the
accused sufficient notice to defend himself.
The averments of the Informations to the effect
that the two accused "with intent to kill, qualified with
treachery did xxx assault, attack and employ personal
violence upon the victims "by then and there shooting
[them] with a gun, hitting [them]" on various parts of
their bodies "which [were] the direct and immediate
cause of [their] death[s]" did not sufficiently set forth
the facts and circumstances describing how treachery
attended each of the killings. Merely averring the
killing of a person by shooting him with a gun, without
more, did not show how the execution of the crime
was directly and specially ensured without risk to the
accused from the defense that the victim might make.
Indeed, the use of the gun as an instrument to kill was
not per se treachery, for there are other instruments
that could serve the same lethal purpose. Nor did the
use of the term treachery constitute z sufficient averment,
for that term, standing alone, was nothing but a

605

,.

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
conclusion of law, not an averment of a fact. In short,
the particular acts and circumstances constituting
treachery as an attendant circumstance in murder
were missing from the informations, (People v
Valdez, 18 January 2012, Bersamin, J.).

b) Yes. S11(a) R122 provides that "[a]n appeal taken
by one or more of several accused shall not affect
those who did not appeal, except insofar as the
judgment of the appellate court is favorable and
applicable to the latter." Here the evidence
against and the conviction of both Eduardo and
Edwin are inextricably linked, considering that the
two accused have acted in concert in their deadly
assault against the victims, warranting their equal
liabiliy under the principle of conspiracy. Hence,
the downgrading of Eduardo's conviction, which
is favorable and applicable to Edwin, should
benefit the latter. (People v. Valdez, 13 February
2013, Bersamin, J.)

0.

Drew was charged and convicted by the MeTC of
Las Pinas City with the crime of falsification of
private documents. The Judgment of conviction
was promulgated on 1 April 2008 In the presence
of Drew and his counsel.
(a) Up to when may Drew appeal, to what court
shall he take his appeal, and how shall he take
his appeal?

(b) Assume that on 14 Aprii 2008 Drew filed a
motion for reconsideration and the same was
denied on 14 May 2008, a copy of which Drew
received on 18 May 2008. Up to when may
Drew appeal? Explain.

606

RULE 122

Appeal

(c) Would your answer be the same If the crime
of which Drew was convicted was the
violation of B.P. Blg. 22? Explain.

Drew was able to timely appeal to the RTC.
The RTC rendered judgment denying the appeal
of Drew. Drew received a copy of the judgment on
1 April 2009. Drew plans to appeal the RTC
decision on questions of law and fact.
d) Up to when may Drew appeal the RTC's decision,
to what court shall he take his appeal, and
how shall he take his appeal? Explain.
e)

Assume that on 14 April 2009 Drew filed a
motion for reconsideration and the same was
denied by the RTC. Drew received a copy of
the order of denial on 1 July 2009. Up to when
may Drew appeal? Explain.

A.
a) Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, Drew may
appeal to the RTC within 15 days from
promulgation of the judgment or up to 16 April
2008 by filing a notice of appeal with the MeTC
and serving a copy thereof upon the adverse
party. (S2 & 6R122]
b) Drew may appeal up to 2 June 2008.
The Supreme Court has held that the fresh 15day period provided for in Neypes v. Court of Appeals
(G.R. No. 141524, 15 September 2005) applies to
appeals in criminal cases, notwithstanding the wordings
of S6 R122. The Supreme Court sald it would be
absurd for an appellant in a civil case to have a better
right of appeal thar the accused in a criminal case
(Yu • Samson-Tatad, G.R. 170979, 9 February 2011)
607

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
c)

No, my answer would not be the same. Drew can
no longer appeal.

Under the Rule on Summary Procedure, a
motion for reconsideration of a judgment is a prohibited
pleading. Cases for violation of B.P. Blg. 22 are
covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure.
Here the motion for reconsideration is a prohibited

an

pleading
did not suspend the running of the
reglementary period to appeal. Hence the judgment
became final and executory on 17 April 2008.
d)

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, Drew may

appeal the RTC's decision to the Court of
Appeals within 15 days from notice of judgment
or until 16 April 2009 by filing a petition for review

under Rule 42 and serving a copy thereof upon
the adverse party. Rule 42 applies since the
RTC's decision was rendered in the exercise of
its appellate jurisdiction. (S2[b] R122)
e)

Drew may appeal up to 16 July 2009.

Under the Rules of Criminal Procedure, the
appeal to the Court of Appeals in cases decided by
the RTC in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
shall be by petition for review under Rule 42, Under
Rule 42, the petition may be filed within 15 days from
notice of the decision or of the denial of the motion for
reconsideration.
Here Drew received notice of the denial of his
motion for reconsideration on 1 July 2009. Hence he
may file the petition for review up to 16 July 2009

608

RULE 124. PROCEDURE IN
THE COURT OF APPEALS
Q.

When should the appellant's brief be filed?

A.

Within 30_days from receipt by the appellant or his
counsel of the notice from the clerk of court of the
Court of Appeals that the evidence is already
attached to the record, the appellant shall file 7 copies

of his brief with the clerk of court which shall be
accompanied by proof of service of 2 coples thereof
upon the appellee. (S3 R124)
Q.

What are the grounds for dismissal of appeal by
the CA?

A,

The CA may, upon motion of the appellee or motu
proprio and with notice to the appellant in either case,
dismiss the appeal on the following grounds: (BENA
SCC DAP)
(a) Appellant fails to file his brief within the prescribed
time, except where the appellant is represented
by a counsel de oficio.

(b) Appellant escapes from prison or confinement,
jumps bail, or flees to a foreign country during the
pendency of the appeal. (S8 R124).

(c) Failure to file the notice of appeal within the
prescribed period.
(d) Failure to pay the docket or other lawful fees.
(e) Failure of lhe appellant to serve and fjle the required

number of copies of his brief or memorandum
within the time provided by the Rules

(f) Absence of specific assignment of errors in the
appellant's brief, or of page references lo the record.

609

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(g) Failure of the appellant to take the necessary
steps for the correction or completion of the record
within the time limited by the court in its order.

(h) Failure of the appellant to comply with orders,
circulars, or directives of the court without justifiable

cause.
(i) The fact that the order or judgment appealed from
is not appealable. (S1 R50; $18 R124).

0.

What rules in civil procedure may be applied to
criminal cases?

A

The provisions of Rules 42, 44 to 46 and 48 t0 56
relating to procedure in the Court of Appeals and in
the Supreme Court in original and appealed civil
cases shall be applied to criminal cases insfofar as
they are applicable and not inconsistent with the
provisions of R124.

0.

ls Rule 47 applicable to criminal cases?

A

No. S1 R47 limits the scope of the remedy of annulment
of judgment to civil actions. The remedy cannot be
resorted to when the RTC judgment being questioned
was rendered in a criminal case. The 2000 Revised
Rules of Criminal Procedure itself does not permit

such recourse, for it excluded R47 from the enumeration

in S18 R124 of the provisions of the 1997 Rules of
Civil Procedure which have suppletory application to
criminal cases. (People v. Bitanga, 26 June 2007).

610

RULE 126. SEARCH AND SEIZURE
Q.

What is a search warrant?

A.

A search warrant is an order in writing issued in the
name ot the People of the Philippines, signed by a
judge and directed to a peace officer, commanding
him to search for personal property described therein
and bring it before the court. (S1 R126)

Q.

May a justice of a collegial court issue a search
warrant?

A.

No, The power to issue search warrants is exclusively
vested with trial judges in the exercise of their judicial
functions. (Manly Sportswear Mfg. Inc. v. Dadodette
Enterprises, G.R. No. 165306, 20 September 2005;
citing Sec. 2, Art. Ill, Constitution).

Q.

What is the nature of a search warrant?

A.

A search warrant proceeding is
a criminal
action or the commencement pf g prosecution. The
proceeding is not one against any person, but is
solely for the discovery and to get possession of
personal property. It however has no relation to a civil
process. It concems the public at large as distinguished
from the ordinary civil action involving the rights of
private persons. It may only be a:lied for in the
furtherance_of rublic prosecution. (United Laboratories,
Inc. v. Isip, G.R. No. 163858, 28 June 2005)
However a private individual or a private corporation
complaining to the NBI or to a government agency
charged with the enforcement of special penal laws,
such as the BFAD, may appear, participate and file
pleadings in the search warrant proceedings to
maintain, inter alia, the validity of a search warrant

in sense
no

611

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
issued by the court and the admissibility of properties

seized in anticipation of a criminal case to be filed;
such private party may do so in collaboration with the

NBI or such government agency. (Id.)
0.

The police filed with the Regional Trial Court an
application for search warrant for theft following
the complaint of PLDT that respondents (officers
and employees of World Wide Web Corporation)
were using the facility of PLOT in order to redirect
long-distance calls to respondents' customers to
the damage and prejudice of PLOT.
The trial court issued the search warrants but
on a motion to quash, the trial court later quashed
the search warrants for being general warrants.
PLOT filed a motion for reconsideration but this
was denied by the trial court on the ground that
PLOT did not get the conformity of the public
prosecutor as required by S5 R110, PLDT
appealed the order quashing the search warrants
to the Court of Appeals.

a) Does PLDT have the personality to challenge
the quashal of the search warrants?
b) ls appeal or a special civil action for certiorari
the proper mode to challenge the order
quashing the search warrants?

A.

a) Yes, PLDT has the legal personality to file appeals

from the orders quashing the search warrant. The
petition filed by PLDT before this Court does not
involve an ordinary criminal action which requires the
participation and conformity of the City Prosecutor or
the Solicitor General when raised before appellate
courts. On the contrary, what is involved here is a

612

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

search warrant proceeding which is not a criminal
action, much less a civil action, but a special criminal
process. (HPS Software v. PLDT, 10 December 2012;
Worldwide Web Corp. v. People, 13 January 2014)

b) Appeal is the appropriate mode. Where a search
warrant is applied for and issued in anticipation of
a criminal case yet to be filed, the order quashing
the warrant ends the judicial process. Hence the

remedy from such an order is appeal and not
certiorari. (Worldwide Web Corp. v. People, 13
January 2014).
Q.

Respondent Presiding Judge issued a search
warrant against the petitioner upon the application of
the NBl on the basis of his finding of probable

cause for a violation of Section 2(b) of B.P. Blg. 33
for hoarding large quantities of liquefied petroleum
gas (LPG) in steel cylinders belonging to respondent
Pryce Gases, Inc. (Pryce Gases). The application
for the search warrant was filed at the instance of
Pryce Gases through its letter to the NBI. The
petitioner filed a motion to quash the search
warrant, raising therein, inter alia, the lack of
probable cause and failure to specify the single
offense committed. The Respondent Presiding
Judge denied the petitioner's motion to quash
The Petitioner then filed a special civil action for
certiorari with the Court of Appeals. The CA
dismissed the petition on the ground that the
People of the Philippines was not impleaded and
no copy of the petition was served on the 0SG,
The Petitioner filed a motion for reconsideration
arguing that it was premature to lmplead the
People of the Philippines as respondents because
no criminal case had yet been filed against him
with only the application for the issuance of the

613

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

search warrant having been made; and that
serving the copy of the petition on the OSG pursuant
to $3 R46 was not indispensable. Nevertheless,
he attached to his motion for reconsideration the
affidavit of service attesting that the copy of the
petition and the motion for reconsideration were
served on the OSG by registered mail. The CA
denied the petitioner's motion for reconsideration
on the ground that although the petitioner had
served on the OSG copies of the petition and the
motion for reconsideration he did not amend the
petition in order to implead the People of the
Philippines as respondents.

a) Was the Petitioner correct in arguing that that
his petition for certiorari did not need to
implead the People of the Philippines because
there was yet no criminal case commenced
in court?

b) Did the CA act properly in dismissing the
petition for certiorari?
A.

a)No Impleading the People of the Philippines in the
petition for certiorari did not depend on whether or not
an actual criminal action had already been commenced
in court against the petitioner. It cannot be denied that
the search warrant in question had been issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, and that fact
rendered the People of the Philippines indispensable
parties in the special civil action for certiorari brought
to nullify the questioned orders of respondent
Presiding Judge. The impleading is further expressly
demanded in S3 R46. Every search warrant is applied
for and issued by and under the authority of the State,
regardless of who initiates its application or causes
its issuance.

614

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

b) Yes. The petitioner could have quickly rectified his
omission by the immediate amendment of the
petition. However, although made aware of the
omission as a fatal defect, he did not cause the
amendment but continued to Ignore the need to
amend, He thereby exhibited his adamant refusal

to recognize the People of the Philippines as
indispensable parties, which impelled the CA to
dismiss the petition. (Te v. Breva 5 August 2015,
Bersamin, J.)
Q.

Distinguish a search warrant from a warrant
of arrest.

A.

A search warrant is for the seizure of personal
property while a warrant of arrest is for the seizure of
a person.
A search warrant may issue 6ven if there is no
criminal case filed in court while a warrant of arrest
may issue only in connection wth a criminal case filed
in court.

Q

Where shall an application for a search warrant
be filed?

A

An application for search warrant shall be filed with
the following: (TReP)
a)

Any court within whose territorial jurisdiction a
crime was committed.

b) For compelling reasons stated in the application,
any court within the judicial region where the
crime was committed if the place of the crime's
commission is known, or any court within the
judicial region where the warrant shall be enforced.

615

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

c)

However if the criminal action has already
been filed, the application shall be made only in
the court_ where the criminal action is pending.
(S2 R126)

•

What is the extent of enforceability of a search
warrant issued by a court under $2 R126?

A.

Taking into account A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC (eff. 31
July 2021), the following rules may be gathered:
1) A search warrant issued under S2(a) R126 is
enforceable only within the court's territorial
jurisdiction.'
2)

A search warrant issued under S2(b) R126 is
enforceable within the judicial region of the court

which issued the search warrant. Compelling
reasons must be stated in the application to
justify the enforcement of the warrant beyond a
court's territorial jurisdiction.
The ruling in Malaloan v. Court of Appeals, e.b.,
232 SCRA 349 (1994), that a search warrant is
enforceable anywhere in the Philippines appears to
have been overturned by A,M. No, 21-06-08-SC.
Q.

Does a municipal trial court has the authority to
issue a search warrant involving an offense over
which it has no jurisdiction, for instance, a violation
of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act?

A.

Yes. Nothing in S2 R126 requires that the court
issuing the search warrant must also have jurisdiction
over the offense, (People v. Castillo, 7 November
2016, Peralta, J.).

'gee 9" whereas clause f A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC

616

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Q.

Atty. Dalmacio, the Director of the National Bureau
of Investigation, applied for a search warrant
before the Executive Judge of RTC Manila. He
alleged in his application that a certain alias
Django was keeping about 10 kilos of shabu in a
wooden cabinet located at Dilian's Store in Paseo
de Sta. Rosa, Laguna, The Executive Judge of

Manila personally examined Atty. Dalmacio and
his witnesses and thereafter issued the search
warrant particularly describing the place to be
searched and the items to be seized.
(a) Can the search warrant issued by the Executive
Judge of Manila be enforced in Laguna?
(b) Can the legal concept of "venue is jurisdictional"

be validly raised in applications for search
warrants? (18 Bar 015).
A.

a) Yes. Applications for search warrants involving
dangerous drugs, heinous crimes, illegal gambling,
and illegal possession of firearms (DH GF) may be
filed with Executive Judge and Vice Executive Judge
of the RTCs of Manila & QC by PNP, NBI, PAOC.TF
(Presidential Anti-Organized Crime Task Force), &
REACT-TF (Reaction against Crimes Task Force).
The search warrant is enforceable outside territorial
jurisdiction of Manila & QC. The application shall be
personally endorsed by the heads of said agencies.
(A.M. No 99-20-09-SC, 25 January 2000).

AM. NO 99-20-09-$C (25 January 2000) and Chapter 5, Section 12 of
A.M. No, 03-8-02-SC(15 February 2004) have been repealed by A.M. No. 21-0608.SC (effective 31 July 2021). Under A.M Ne. 21-06-08-SC, a search warrant
cannot be enforced beyond the issuing court's judicial region
Moreover, a
compelling reason should be stated the application

n

617

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

b) No. An application for a search warrant is not a
criminal action but a special criminal process.
Hence, the place where the application is to be
filed is governed by Supreme Court rules and
issuances and not by statute.
Q.

Petitioners received information that respondent
was selling in Its premises in Baao, Camarines
Sur, liquefied petroleum gas by illegally refllllng
the steel cylinders manufactured by and bearing
the duly registered trademark and device of Petron.
The NBI, in behalf of Petron and Shell, filed with
the RTC of Naga City, two separate applications
for search warrant for vlolation of R.A. No. 8293
against respondent. The RTC-Naga City issued an
order granting said applications and issuing the
search warrants. On the same day, the NBI served
the warrants at the respondent's premises, and
the items described in the warrants were seized.
Respondent filed a motion to quash the
search warrants where the only grounds cited
were: (a) there was no probable cause, (b) there
had been a lapse of four weeks from the date of
the test-buy to the date of the search and seizure
operations, and (c) most of the cylinders seized
were not owned by respondent but by a third person.
The RTC of Naga city denied the motion to quash.
However, respondent's new counsel filed an
appearance with motion for reconsideration. It
was only in said motion where respondent raised
for the first time, the Issue of the impropriety of
filing the application for search warrant at
the RTC-Naga City when the alleged crime was
committed in a place (Baa0, Camarines Sur)
within the territorial jurisdiction of the RTC-Ariga

618

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

City. Respondent pointed out that the application
filed with the RTC-Naga City, although within the
same judicial region as lriga City, failed to state
any compelling reason to justify the filing of the

same in a court which does not have territorial
jurisdiction over the place of the commission of
the crime, as required by S2(b) R126. May the
court grant the motion for reconsideration?
A.

No. Under the omnibus motion rule (S8 R15), all
available objections must be included in a party's
motion, otherwise, said objections shall be deemed
waived. Here, the respondent failed to raise the
objection regarding the impropriety of the application

in his motion to quash the search warrant Respondent's
argument that the matter is jurisdictional is without merit,
Applications for the issuance of search warrants are
not criminal in nature and, thus, the rule that venue is
jurisdictional does not apply thereto. The issue of
whether the application should have been filed in
RTC-Jriga City or RTC-Naga City, is not one involving
jurisdiction because the power to lssue a special
criminal process is inherent in all courts. (Pilipinas
Sholl Petroleum Corp. v. Romars International Gases
Corporation, 16 February 2015, Peralta, J.).
Q.

An application for a search warrant was filed in
the RTC of Manila In relation to theft committed in
Manila. The search warrant was issued by the
RTC of Manila for the search of premises located
In Baguio City. May the search warrant be
enforced in Baguio City?

A.

Yes. Section 3 of the Interim Rules provides that
specified writs issued by a RTC are enforceable only
within its judicial region

619

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

3. Writs and processes.-(a) Writs of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus, quo
warranto, habeas corpus and injunction [CPM

HQl] issued by a regional trial court may be
enforced in any part of the region
(b) AIl other processes, whether issued by a regional
trial court or a metropolitan trial court, municipal
trial court or municipal circuit trial court may be
served anywhere in the Philippines, and, in the
last three cases, without a certification by the

judge of the regional trial court. [Emphasis supplied]
A search warrant is not among the specified writs
under Sec. 3(a) which are enforceable only within the
judicial region, It falls under Sec. 3(b) since it is a
judicial process. Hence it is enforceable anywhere in
the Philippines. (/Malaloan v. Court of Appeals, e.b.,
232 SCRA 249, 264 [1994])
Q.

The PNP-Criminal Investigation and Detection
Group of Region 8 filed an application with Judge
S of the RTC of Bassey, Samar, for the issuance
of two search warrant to search Cell Nos. 1 and 2
of the Sub-Provincial Jail of Baybay, Leyte, where
Mayor Espinosa Sr, and his co-accused Yap were
detained. The Application for Search Warrant against
Espinosa Sr. was for violation of R.A.
10591 wherein it was alleged that despite being an
inmate, Espinosa, Sr. "has in his possession an

unlicensed firearm ... (one caliber .45 pistol and
magazine assembly and several rounds of live
ammunitions) •. kept and concealed particularly
under his pillow in his bedside inside Cell No. 1,

Baybay Sub-Provincial Jail, Baybay City, Leyte."

620

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

The Application for Search Warrant against

Yap was for violation of R.A. 9165 and states that
Yap has in his possession "several grams of Illegal
Drugs and paraphernalia kept and concealed

particularly under his pillow in his bed inside his

cell at Cell No. 2, Baybay Sub-Provincial Jail." The
applications for search warrants were granted by
Judge S. In the course of the service of the two search

warrants, the occupants of the cells, Espinosa Sr,
and. Yap, were killed under circumstances that
are not yet clear. May a search warrant issue for

the search of an inmate in a governmentcontrolled detention facility ?
A.

Yes. A search warrant may issue for the search of a
detention prisoner/inmate if incidental to a criminal
investigation and applied for by law officers not in
control of detention facility. The members of the
CIDG--Region 8 had no supervision over the Baybay
Sub Provincial Jail and the purpose of their search is
to gather evidence against the inmates. They cannot
simply enter the detention facility, an alleged haven
for illegal drugs, without complying with R126.
The problem with the view that only prior
coordination with correctional officers of the facility is
needed to conduct a search on a particular jail cell is
that these correctional officers are the very same
people who are accused of supporting the illegal drug
activities of the inmates. It would make it almost impossible
for the government to suppress the proliferation of
drugs, weapons, and other contrabands in a detention
facility where unscrupulous correctional officers are
accused of protecting illegal drug activities. (Confused
Citizens of Region 8 v. Arguelles, 26 January 2021
e.b., per curiam)

621

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Where shall an application for a cybercrime
warrant be filed?

A.

An application for a cybercrime warrant concerning a
violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses) and/or
Section 5 (Other Offenses), Chapter II of RA 10175
(Cybercrime Prevention Act) shall be filed by the law
enforcement authorities before any of the designated
cybercrime couts of the province or the city where

the offense or any of its elements has been
committed, is being committed, or Is about to be
committed, or where any part of the computer
system used is situated, or where any of the damage
caused to a natural or juridical person took place.
However, the cybercrime courts in Quezon City,
the City of Manila, Makati City, Pasig City, Cebu City,
l oilo City, Davao City and Cagayan De Oro City shall
have the special authority to act on applications and
issue warrants which shall be enforceable nationwide
and outside the Philippines. (Sec. 2.2, Rule on
Cybercrime Warrants).°

On the other hand, an application for a warrant
under this Rule for violation of Section 6, Chapter II of
RA 10175 (all crimes defined and penalized by the
Revised Penal Code, as amended, and other special
laws, if committed by, through, and with the use of
ICT) shall be filed by the law enforcement authorities
with the regular or other specialized regional trial
courts, as the case may be, in the province or city
section 2.2 of the Rule on Cybercrime Warrants gives the impression
that ybercrime warrants issued by cybercrire courts other than those pf
Quezon City, etc.. may be enforced only within their judicial regions. It is opined
that this is not the intention of the rule since search and other juical warrarts are
enforceable nationwide. (Malaloan v. Court of Appeals, 232 SCRA 249), The
Intent of the rule appears to be that an application for cybercrime warrant may be
filod in tho cyberarime courts of Quezon City, etc., even if the crime did not occur
or one of the elements occurred in Quezon City etc.or even if the computer
system is not situated or the damage was not caused in Quezon City, etc.

622

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

where the offense or any of its elements has been
committed, is being committed, or is about to be
committed, or where any part of the computer system
used is situated, or where any of the damage caused
to a natural or juridical person took place. {Id.).
Q.

Atty.

Dalmacio,

the

Director

of the

National

Bureau of Investigation, applied for a search
warrant before the Executive Judge of RTC

Manila. He alleged in his application that a certain
allas Django was keeping about 1 O kilos of shabu
in a wooden cabinet located at Dillian's Store in
Paseo de Sta. Rosa, Laguna. The Executive Judge
of Manila personally examined Atty. Dalmacio and
his witnesses and thereafter issued the search
warrant particularly describing the place to be
searched and the items to be seized.
(a) Can the search warrant issued by the Executive
Judge of Manila be enforced In Laguna?

A.
a) Yes Applications for search warrants involving
dangerous drugs, heinous crimes, illegal gambling,
and illegal possession of firearms (DH GF) may
be filed with Executive Judge and Vice Executive
Judge of the RTCs of Manila & QC by PNP, NBI,
PAOC-TF (Presidential Anti-Organized Crime
Task Force), & REACT-TF (Reaction against Crimes

Task Force). The search warrant is enforceable
outside territorial jurisdiction of Manila & QC. The
application shall be personally endorsed by the
heads of said agencies. (A.M. No. 99-20-09-SC,
25 January 2000).

623

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

State the constitutional

provision on

search

warrant,
A.

The right of the people to be secure in their persons,

houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable
searches and seizures of whatever nature and for any
purpose shall be inviolable, and no search warrant

shall Issue except upon probable cause to be
determined personally by the judge after examination
under oath or affirmation of the complainant and the
witnesses he may produce, and particularly describing
the place to be searched and the persons or things to
be seized. (Sec. 2, Art. II, Constitution).

•

What are the requisites for the issuance of a
search warrant? (P POP)

A,

The requisites tor the issuance of a search warrant are:

(a) There must be probable cause
(b) The probable cause must be determined personally
by the judge after examination under oath or
affirmation of the complainant and the witnesses
he may produce.

(c) The search warrant must particularly describe the
place to be searched and the things to be seized

(d) The search warrant shall issue in connection with
one specific offense only. (S4 R126).
O.

How shall the judge make the personal determination
of probable cause?

A.

The judge must before issuing the warrant personally
examine in the form of searching questions and answers,
in writing and under path, the complainant and the
witnesses he may produce on facts personally known

624

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

to them and attach to the record their sworn
statements, together with the affidavits submitted. (S5
R126). (SOWPA)
Q.

In an application for a search warrant, the RTC
judge personally examined only the witness (the
police officer who conducted the surveillance) but
not the complainant. On certiorari, the Court of
Appeals nullified the search warrant on the ground
that pursuant to S4 R126, the judge should have
personally examined "the complainant and the
witnesses." ls the CA's reasoning correct?

A.

No. In application for search warrant under S4 R126,
it is not necessary that both the complainant and the
witnesses must be examined by the judge. An
examination of either one of them would be sufficient
if adequate to establish probable cause. (People V.
Gabiosa, 29 January 2020, Caguioa, J.)

Q.

A search warrant in relation to illegal possession
of drugs was issued against the accused. During
the service of the search warrant, illegal drugs
and firearm were found in the premises. The
accused were arrested and criminal informations
for possession of illegal drugs and illegal possession
of firearms were filed against them.

When counsel for the accused found that the
search warrant's supporting documents were not
part of the court records, they filed a Motion for
Production of Records of Examinations of
Applicant and Witnesses (Motion for Production).
They requested records of the issuing judge's
examinations of the applicant and their witnesses
If any. The Motion recommended that the names
and personal circumstances of the examined

625

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

witnesses be redacted, as may be necessary to
protect the witnesses' identities. The Motion tor

Production was denied by the Judge.
The People argued that the depositions of
witnesses should form part only of search warrant

application records and not of court records and

that search warrant records are not readily available
for public scrutiny, and their production ls subject

to the trial court's discretion. Was it proper for the
judge to deny the Motion for Production?
A.

No. While a judge's determination of probable cause
in issuing a search warrant will generally be upheld if
supported by substantial basis, the existence of such
basis requires proof on record that the issuing judge
"personally and thoroughly examined the applicant
and his witnesses." The accused should have been
given the opportunity to examine the basis for their
arrest and subsequent criminal prosecution. This is
the essence of due process constitutionally guaranteed
to the accused.
The prosecution failed to prove that denying the
accused access to the search warrant records would
be in line with meeting a compelling state interest and
would be the least restrictive of accused's right
against unreasonable search and seizure. It was
grave error for Judge Contreras to deny the accused
access to records that would have aided them in
asserting their fundamental rights. The accused were
amenable to redacting the names of the witnesses
and their personal circumstances. In any event, the
State's interest in protecting the identities of confidential
informants cannot outweigh the constitutional rights of

the accused. (Zafe v. People, 3 May 2021, Leonen, J.)

626

RULE 126

Search and Seizure

Q.

May hearsay statements of the complainant
and/or witnesses be the basis for the Issuance of
a search warrant?

A

No, since the rules require that the complainant and
the witnesses be examined on facts personally known
to them. When the law speaks of facts, the reference
is to facts, data, or information personally known to
the applicant and the witnesses he may present.
Absent the element of personal knowledge by the
applicant or his witnesses of the facts upon which the
issuance of a search warrant may be justified, the
warrant is deemed not based on probable cause and
is a nullity.
While hearsay information or tips from confidential

informants could very well serve as basis for the
issuance of a search warrant, the same is only true If
such information or tip was followed-up personally by
the recipient and validated. (People v. Madera2zo, 10
December 2018, Peralta, J).
Q.

Convicted by the trial court of possession of
shabu, the accused Ogayon for the first time on
appeal in the Court of Appeals argued that the
search warrant was null and void since there was
nothing in the records or evidence to show that
the judge undertook a searching personal examination
in writing and under oath of the complainant and
the witnesses. The Court of Appeals ruled
however that the accused waived the objection to
the nullity of the search warrant when he failed to
raise It before the trial court, invoking $14 R126.
Was the CA's ruling correct?

A.

No. The requirement to raise objections against search
warrants during trial is a procedural rule established
by jurisprudence. Compliance or noncompliance with
this requirement cannot in any way diminish the
627

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
constitutional guarantee that a search warrant should
be issued upon a finding of probable cause. Ogayon's
failure to make a timely objection cannot serve to cure

the inherent defect of the warrant. To uphold the

validity of the void warrant would be to disregard one
of the most fundamental rights guaranteed in our

Constitution. In the light of the nullity of the search
warrant, the search conducted on its authority is
likewise null and void. Under the Constitution, any
evidence obtained in violation of a person's right
against unreasonable searches and seizures shall be

inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding.
Ogayon should be acquitted. (Ogayon v People, 2
September 2015, Brion, J.).
Q.

In order to determine whether the search warrant
particularly describes the place to be searched
and the things to be seized, may the application
for search warrant and its supporting documents
which were incorporated by reference to the
search warrant be taken into consideration?

A.

Yes. Here the application for search warrant and its
supporting documents were incorporated by reference
or physically attached to the search warrant to enable
the warrant officer to identify the specific clothes to be
searched. (Dimal v. People, 18 April 2018, Peralta, J.)

Q.

What are the personal property which may be
seized under the warrant?

A

A search warrant may be issued for the search and
seizure of personal property: (PUS)
(a) Subiect of the offense.
(b) Stolen or embezzled and other proceeds or fruits
of the offense.

(c)

[Used or intended to be used as the means of
committing the offense. (S3 R126)

628

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Q.

Petitioner contends that human skeletons or
remains may not be the subject of a search warrant
since these are not personal property. Is this

contention correct?
A.

No. "Personal property" in the context of S3 R126
refers to the thing's mobility, and not to its capacity to
be owned or alienated by a particular person. Article
416 of the Civil Code states that in general, all things
which can be transported from place to place are
deemed to be personal property. Considering that
human remains can generally be transported from
place to place and considering further that they qualify
under the phrase "subject of the offense" given that
they prove the crime's corpus delicti, it follows that
they may be valid subjects of a search warrant. (Laud
v. People, 741 SCRA 239 [2014]).

Q.

In whose presence shall the search of a house,
room, or other premises be made?

A

No search of a house, room, or any other premises
shall be made except in the presence of the lawful
occur.ant thereof or any member of
bis family or in the
absence of the latter,
witnesses of sufficient age
and discretion residing in the same locality. (S8
R126). (OFW)

two

It must be stressed that it is only upon the
absence of the lawful occupant or any member of his
family that their presence may be replaced by 2
witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing in
the same locality. A violation of S8 R126 makes the
search unreasonable and renders any evidence
seized by virtue thereof inadmissible pursuant to the
exclusionary rule. (Bulauitan v. People, 19 September
2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

629

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q

While the search of the accused's bungalow
house pursuant to a search warrant was ongoing,
the accused was ordered to stay at the main door
while the police searched his bedroom. Illegal

drugs were found inside the bedroom, May these
drugs be used in evidence against the accused?

A.

No,

S8 R126 provides that no search of a house,

room, or any other premises shall be made except in

the presence of the lawful occupant thereof or any
member of his family. Here, although the accused
was in his house, he did not witness the actual search

because he was ordered to stay at the main door
while the search in his bedroom was ongoing. It is as

If the search was conducted without his presence.
The noncompliance with S8 R126 tainted the search
from the very beginning rendering the seized items
inadmissible in evidence for being the proverbial fruit
of the poisonous tree. (Tabingo v. People, 1 February
2021, Peralta, C.J.).

0.

Police operatives of the Western Police District,
Philippine National Police, applied for a search
warrant in the Regional Trial Court for the search
of the house of Juan Santos and the seizure of an
undetermined amount of shabu. The team arrived
at the house of Santos but failed to find him there.
Instead the team found Roberto Co.

The team conducted a search In the house of
Santos in the presence of Roberto Co and
barangay officials and found ten grams of shabu.
Roberto Co was charged in court with illegal
possession of ten grams of shabu.

630

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Before his arraignment, Roberto Co flied a
motion to quash the search warrant on the
following grounds: (a) he was not the accused
named in the search warrant; and (b) the warrant

does not describe the article to be seized with
sufficient particularity. Resolve the motion with
reasons. (05 Bar Q14),

A.

The motion to quash the search warrant should
be denied.

a) The ground that Roberto Co was not the accused
named in the search warrant is without merit.
The Supreme Court has held that where the
search warrant is issued for the search of specifically

described premises only and not for the search of a
person, the failure to name the owner or occupant of
such property in the affidavit and search warrart does
not invalidate the warrant.
White Co may not have been the person subject
of the search, the fact that he was caught in flagrante
delicto necessitated his valid warrantless arrest
Therefore, the fact that his name was not indicated in
the search warrant is immaterial. [Quelnan vs. People,
526 SCRA 653, G.R. No. 166061 July 6, 2007)

b) The ground that the warrant does not describe the
article to be seized with sufficient particularity is
without merit.
The Supreme Court has held that the description
"an undetermined amount of" a specific drug satisfies
the requirement of particularity in the description of
the thing to be seized. To require that the warrant
specify beforehand the amount of the drug to be
seized would be require something which is virtually
impossible. [People v. Tee, 395 SCRA 419]

631

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

When the police searched the bedroom of
accused spouses, the latter were not present as
they were in the sala of the house. The police
found marijuana in the bedroom. During the trial,
the accused did not object to the admissibility of
the marijuana seized but only raised it in their
motion for reconsideration of the judgment of
conviction. May the seized marijuana be used in
evidence against the accused?

A.

No, since the marijuana was the product of an illegal
search. The police did not comply with S8 R126
requiring the presence of the lawful occupant in the
search of a room. The inadmissibility of the evidence
obtained was not defeated by the fact that accused
failed to timely object to such evidence's admissibility
during trial This is because the right against unlawful
search is a fundamental constitutional right. (Dabon v.
People, 22 January 2018, Tijam, J.).

0.

What is the period of validity or effectivity of a
search warrant?

A.

A search warrant shall be valid for 10 days from its
date. Thereafter it shall be void. (S10 R126)
A cybercrime warrant shall only be effective for
the length of time as determined by the court, which
shall not exceed a period of 10 days from its
issuance. The court issuing the warrant may, upon
motion, extend its effectivity based only on justifiable
reasons for a period not exceeding 10 days from the
expiration of the original period. (Rule on Cybercrime
Warrants).

632

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that a search
or seizure must be authorized by a warrant?

A.

The following are the exceptions wherein a warrantless
search may be validly made: (CPA SCAM)
1) SEARCH INCIDENTAL TO LAWFUL ARREST. A
person lawfully arrested may be searched for
dangerous weapons or anything which may have
been used or constitute proof in the commission
of an offense without a search warrant. (S13
R12). The scope thereof should be limited to the
area within which the arrestee can reach for a
weapon or for evidence in order to destroy it.

(Chimel v. California, 395 US. 752)
2)

CONSENT OR WAIVER. If the person searched
consented to the warrantless search, then the

same is valid.

However silence or implied

acquiescence ls not considered as a consent to a

warrantless search, The right against a warrantless
search may be waived but the waiver must be
clear and unequivocal, that is, no room for doubt
must be left.
3)

SEARCH OF MOVING VEHICLE. The guaranty
of freedom from unreasonable searches and
seizures is construed as recognizing a necessary
difference between a search of a dwelling house
or other stationary structure in respect of which a
search warrant may readily be obtained and a
search of a moving vehicle where it is not
practicable to secure a warrant because the
vehicle can be quickly moved out of the locality or
jurisdiction in which the warrant must be sought.
(Caroll v. Unied
t States, 267 U.S. 132)

633

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
4) CHECK POINTS. "Stop and search" without warrant
at military or police checkpoints have been
declared valid so long as it is required by the
exigencies of public order and conducted in the
least intrusive manner to motorists. (Valmonte v
de Ville, 178 SCRA 211)

A checkpoint search may either be a mere
routine inspection or it may involve an extensive
search. For a mere routine inspection, the search is
normally permissible when it is limited to a mere
visual search, where the occupants are not subjected
to a physical or body search. On the other hand,
when the vehicle is stopped and subjected to an
extensive search, it would be constitutionally permissible
only if the officers conducting the search had probable
cause to believe before the search that either the
motorist is a law offender or they will find the
instrumentality or evidence pertaining to a crime in the
vehicle to be searched. (ANTONIO B. NACHURA,
OUTLINE REVIEWER IN POLITICAL LAW 130
[2006], citing cases)

5)

BODY CHECKS IN AIRPORTS. Search made
pursuant to routine airpot security procedure,
which is allowed under Section 9 of Republic Act
No. 6235, constitutes another exception to the
proscription against warrantless searches and
seizures. RA. No, 6235 authorizes search for
prohibited materials or substances. "To limit the
action of the airport security personnel to simply
refusing her entry into the aircraft and sending
her home (as suggested by appellant), and
thereby depriving them of 'the ability and facility
to act accordingly, including to further search
without warrant, in light of such circumstances,
would be to sanction impotence and ineffectivity

634

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

in law enforcement, to the detriment of society.'
Thus, the strip search in the ladies' room was
justified under the circumstances." (People v.
Canton, G.R. No. 148825, 27 December 2002).

6)

PLAIN VIEW EXCEPTION. Contraband and other
items subject of seizure even if not described in a

search warrant but falling in plain view of an
officer may be seized and introduced in evidence.
(Harris v. United States, 390 U.S. 234)

7)

STOP AND FRISK. "Stop and frisk" also known
as a "Terry search" is the right of a police officer
to stop a citizen on the street, interrogate him and
pat him for weapons and contraband whenever
he observes unusual conduct which leads him to
conclude that criminal activity may be afoot.
(Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1). The police officer
must have a genuine reason, in accordance with
his experience and the surrounding conditions, to
warrant the belief that the person to be searched
has weapons or contraband concealed about
him. (People • Sy Chua, G.R. Nos. 136066-67,
4 February 2003).

0.

After a lawful warrantless arrest based on S5(b)
R113, the police conducted an initial cursory body
search on the accused which yielded only personal
belongings of the accused, The police then
brought the accused to the police station where
they conducted a more thorough search on the
accused which yielded nine plastic sachets of
shabu. May the shabu be used in evidence
against the accused?

A

No. Case law requires a strict application of this rule,
that is, "to absolutely limit a warrantless search of a
person who is lawfully arrested to his or her person at
the time of and incident to his or her arrest and to
635

.
-·

PRIMERR-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
dangerous weapons or anything which may be used

as proof of the commission of the offense." Such
warrantless search obviously cannot be made in a
place other than the place of arrest.

The first search made on accused, i.e., the
cursory body search which, however, did not yield any
drugs but only personal belongings of petitioners, may
be considered as a search incidental to a lawful arrest
as it was done contemporaneous to their arrest and at
the place of apprehension. On the other hand, the
same cannot be said of the second search which

yielded the drugs subject of this case, considering
that a substantial amount of time had already elapsed
from the time of the arrest to the time of the second
search, not to mention the fact that the second search
was conducted at a venue other than the place of
actual arrest, le., at the Police Station.
The second search made on accused at the
Panabo Police Station is unlawful and unreasonable.
Resultantly, the illegal drugs allegedly recovered
therefrom constitutes inadmissible evidence pursuant
to the exclusionary clause enshrined in the 1987
Constitution. Given that said illegal drugs is the very
corpus delicti of the crime charged, accused must
necessarily be acquitted and exonerated from criminal
liability (Vaporoso v. People, 3 June 2019, PerlasBernabe, J.).
Q.

Police officers received a text message that a
Marvin Buya would be transporting marijuana. They
put up a check-point. A jeepney was stopped and
the driver signaled to the policeman two passengers
who were carrying marijuana. Accused Victor
Cogaed, one of the indicated passengers, was
asked to open his bag and when he did, marijuana
was found inside. May the marijuana be admitted
in evidence against the accused?
636

RULE 126

Search and Seizure
A.

No, since there was no valid search, The case would

not come under the stop-and-frisk" exception to the
search warrant requirement. A basic criterion of this
exception would be that the police officer, with his or
her personal knowledge, must observe the facts
leading to the suspicion of an illicit act. It is the police
officer who should observe facts that would lead to a

reasonable degree of suspicion of a person, The
police officer should not adopt the suspicion initiated
by another person. This is necessary to justify that
the person suspected be stopped and reasonably
searched. Anything less than this would be an
infringement upon one's basic right to security of
one's person and effects.
Here Cogaed was simply a passenger carrying a
bag and traveling aboard a jeepney. There was
nothing suspicious, moreover, criminal, about riding a
jeepney or carrying a bag, The assessment of suspicion
was not made by the police officer but by the jeepney
driver. It was the driver who signalled to the polico
that Cogaed was "suspicious."
The fact that Cogaed was the one who opened
his bag would not amount to a waiver of the
Constitutional right against unlawful search. The
waiver must be clear and unequivocal. Here the act
of opening the bag was brought about by the directive
of the police officer, a person in authority and an
intimidatig
n figure. (People v. Cogaed, 30 July 2014)

0.

In the morning of 17 March 2010, Police Chief
Inspector Randolph Beniat (Chief Inspector
Beniat) received information from a police asset
that Manibog was standing outside the Municipal
Tourism Office of Dingras, locos Norte with a gun
tucked in his waistband. To verity this information,

637

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Chief Inspector Beniat immediately organized a
team. Together, they proceeded to the Municipal
Tourism Office located around 20 meters from the
police station.
About five to eight meters away from the
Municipal Tourism Office, Chief Inspector Beniat
saw Manibog standing outside the building. The
team slowly approached him for fear that he might
fight back. As he moved closer, Chief Inspector
Beniat saw a bulge on Manibog's waist, which the
police officer deduced to be a gun due to its
distinct contour.
Chief Inspector Benlat went up to Manibog,
patted the bulging object on his waist, and
confirmed that there was a gun tucked in Manib0g's
waistband. He disarmed Manibog of the .45
caliber handgun Inside a holster, after which he
arrested him for violating the election gun ban
and brought him to the police station for an
inquest proceeding. Was there a valid warrantiess
search of Manibog?
A.

Yes. The tip on Manibog, coupled with the police
officers' visual confirmation that Manibog had a gunshaped object tucked in his waistband, led to a
reasonable suspicion that he was carrying a gun
during an election gun ban. However, a reasonable
suspicion is not synonymous with the personal
knowledge required under Section 5(a) and () R113
to effect a valid warrantless arrest. Thus, the Court of
Appeals erred in ruling that the search conducted on
Manibog fell under the established exception of a
warrantless search incidental to a lawful arrest.

638

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Nonetheless, the combination of the police
asset's tip and the arresting officers' observation of a
gun-shaped object under Manibog's shirt already
suffices as a genuine reason for the arresting officers
to conduct a stop and frisk search on Manibog. Hence,
the trial court correctly upheld the reasonableness of
the warrantless search on Manibog. (Manibog v.
People, 20 March 2019, Leonen, J.).
Q.

On

February

1, 2011, the

police officers of

Ocampo, Camarines Sur supposedly received a
report that there was a suspicious person with
something tucked in his waist. The Chief of Police
of the Ocampo Police Station, Police Inspector
Villamer dispatched a team to verify the report.
The report eventually resulted in the arrest of
Marvin along me highway of Barangay San Francisco,
Ocampo, Camarines Sur, for the illegal possession
of firearm. He was, thereafter, subjected to a

search of his body and of the bag allegedly found
in his possession. Inside the bag, the arresting
officer found an assortment of documents, including
photocopies of the official receipt (OR) and
certificate of registration (CR) of a stolen motorcycle.
Was there a valid stop-and-frisk of Marvin which
would justify the warrantless search on him?
A.

No. In order to be considered valid, a stop and frisk
search must be premised on the manifest overt acts
of an accused, which give law enforcers a "genuine
reason" to conduct the search. Jurisprudence has
refined the standard to less than probable cause, but
more than mere suspicion, The search cannot be
based on a suspicion or a hunch. Their suspicion is
formed on the basis of the law enforcers' prior experience
with criminals and their behavior, as well as the
surrounding circumstances of the case.

639

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
In some cases, the Court has also required the
presence of more than one activity which, when taken
together, gives a reasonable inference of criminal
activity. This is determined on a case-to-case basis,
as when a man with reddish eyes, walking in a

swaying manner, avoided the police officers approaching
him, or when a person was seen placing a heatsealed plastic sachet containing a white substance
inside a cigarette case. For this particular case,
however, the Court cannot discern any circumstance
that would give SPO4 Pequiras a genuine reason to
stop-and-frisk Marvin
The prosecution stated that Marvin was arrested
and searched because the police received a report
regarding a suspicious person with something tucked
in his waist. But in his testimony, SPO4 Pequiras did
not specify the actions or behavior of Marvin, or the
factual circumstances occurring prior to his arrest and
search. He simply stated that Marvin was arrested
due to the anonymous tip. SPO4 Pequiras did not
even state how they were able to identify Marvin as
the suspicious person referred to in the concerned
citizen's report. Evidently, these are not enough to
create a reasonable inference of criminal activity.
(Portera v. People, 20 March 2019, Reyes, J.)
Q.

Accused was chased and arrested by the police
after he had fired a gun against them. Recovered
from him was a bag containing marijuana. Convicted
of illegal possession of drugs, he argues that the
marijuana could not be used against him as it was
not selzed by virtue of the plain view doctrine, the
same being contained inside the bag. Was the
accused's contention correct?

640

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

A.

No, Under S13 R126 a person lawfully arrested may
be searched for dangerous weapons or for anything

which may be used in evidence without a search warrant,
Here, the marijuana was found in a black bag in

Calantiao's possession and within his immediate
control, He could have easily taken any weapon from
the bag or dumped it to destroy the evidence inside it
As the black bag containing the marijuana was in
Calantiao's possession, it was within the permissible
area that the apprehending officers could validly
conduct a warrantless search.
Calantiao's argument that the marijuana cannot
be used as evidence against him because its
discovery was in violation of the Plain View Doctrine,
is misplaced. "The doctrine is usually applied where a
police officer is not searching for evidence against the
accused, but nonetheless inadvertently comes across
an incriminating object x x x. [It] serves to supplement
the prior justification - whether it be a warrant for
another object, hot pursuit, search incident to lawful
arrest, or some other legitimate reason for being
present unconnected with a search directed against
the accused -- and permits the warrantless seizure."
The Plain View Doctrine thus finds no applicability
in Calantiao's situation because the police officers
purposely searched him upon his arrest The police
officers did not inadvertently come across the black
bag, which was in Calantiao's possession; they
deliberately opened it, as part of the search incident
to Calantiao's lawful arrest. (People v. Calantlao, 18
June 2014, Leonardo-De Castro, J.)

641

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

At around 7 am of 10 September 2015 in Purok 2,
Barangay San Juan, Gingoog City, Alfredo Salucana

(Salucana) went to the Ging0og City Police
Station to report a mauling incident where Acosta
purportedly hit him with a piece of wood. He also
reported that Acosta was Illegally planting
marijuana. Salucana's foregoing reports prompted

the police officers to proceed to Acosta's home In
Purok 2, Barangay San Juan, Gingoog City.
Thereat, Salucana positively identified Acosta
who was then walking on the trail leading towards

his house. The police officers then rushed towards
Acosta and arrested him before he entered his
home. After the arrest, the police found 13 hills of
suspected marijuana plants planted beneath the

"gabi" plants just outside Acosta's home, and
around a meter away from where he was arrested.
During the trial, the prosecution argued that the
warrantless seizure of the marijuana plants was
justified under the Plain Viow Doctrine. ls the
prosecution's argument correct?
A.

No, Plain-view exception to search warrant applies
only if discovery was inadvertent. The testimonies of
the police officers collectively paint the picture that
they proceeded with the arrest of Acosta for the
mauling incident armed with prior knowledge that he
was also illegally planting marijuana. Hence the discovery
of the marijuana was not inadvertent. (People v.
Acosta, 28 January 2019, Perlas-Bernabe, J),'

Q.

Hearing reports that Big Rock Mining was
conducting mining operations In violation of a
cease·and-desist order issued by the Mines and

"Athough not raised as an issue in the case, the arrest of Acosta was
umlawtat since the arresting officer's did not have probable cause based on
personal knowledge. (See S5[b] R113) Their determination of probable cause
was base on what Sa/uana toid them,

642

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Geosciences Board, Mayor P together with 8
policemen and some barangay officials entered
the premises of Big Rock Mining. They did not

find any ongoing mining activity but one of the
policemen noticed the door of a storeroom ajar
and saw bags inside. When opened, the bags

yielded Illegal explosives. May the illegal explosives
be used in evidence against Big Rock Mining's
officers?

A.

No. Plain view doctrine does not apply when law
enforcement officers were not in a "lawful position"
when they discovered the items. Mayor P and his
team did not have any legal authority to enter and
inspect the premises of Big Rock Mining. Even assuming

that they were in a lawful position, the explosives
were not in plain view since they were still inside the
v. Cu, 27 Aug 2020, Peralta, C.J.).
bags. (Piapil
l
Q.

The police conducted a surveillance operation
against the suspects. A certain Mallari who
accompanied the police approached the subject
house and then went to the police officers and
told them that drugs were being used in the
accused's house. The police went inside the
house and saw several persons using drugs. They
arrested these person and the accused, and also
seized the drugs found. The prosecution justified
the warrantless seizure of the drugs under the
Plain View Doctrine. However Mallari was not
presented in court as a witness. Was the Plair
View Doctrine applicable in this case?

A.

No. The "plain view" doctrine applies when the
following requisites concur; (a) the law enforcement
officer in search of the evidence has a prior
justification for an intrusion or is in a position from
which he can view a particular area; (b) the discovery
of evidence in plain view is inadvertent, (c) it is

643

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
immediately apparent to the officer that the item he
observes may be evidence of a crime, contraband or
otherwise subject to seizure. The law enforcement

officer must lawfully make an initial intrusion or properly
be in a position from which he can particularly view
the area. In the course of such lawful intrusion, he
inadvertently comes across a piece of evidence
incriminating the accused. The object must be open to
eye and hand and its discovery inadvertent.
Here, it was a certain Mallari who saw that drugs
were being used inside accused's house during the
surveillance operation. However, Mallari was never
presented as a witness. His rank as a police officer
and his assigned role during the alleged surveillance
operation were not provided by the prosecution. Thus,
it could not be determined from the records whether
the requisites of the plain view search were complied
with against accused's alleged crime of maintenance
of a drug den. The validity of the plain view search is
crucial since it will determine whether the police
officers conducted a valid warrantless search and
arrest against accused and his house. The prosecution
did not give any justification for its failure to present
Mallari as a witness. (People v. Carino, 25 March
2019, Gesmundo, J.).
Q.

Police received a tip that a certain "Baho" who
was later identified as Veridiano was on the way
to San Pablo City to procure illegal drugs. The
police set up a check-point in Nagcarlan, Laguna.
The police officers at the check-point personally
knew Veridiano, They allowed some vehicles to
pass through after checking that he was not on
board. At around 10:00 a.m., they chanced upon
Veridiano inside a passenger jeepney coming
from San Pablo, Laguna. They flagged down the
jeepney and asked the passengers to disembark.

644

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

The police officers instructed the passengers to
raise their t-shirts to check for possible concealed
weapons and to remove the contents of their
pockets.The police recovered from Veridiano a tea
bag containing marijuana. May the marijuana
seized be used In evidence against Veridiano?

A.

No, There was no valid warrantless arrest since
Veridiano was not committing a crime when he was
arrested. The search at the check-point was not valid.
Such a search must be limited to a visual search and
not be an extensive search of the vehicle or a body
search of the occupant. The extensive search conducted
by the police officers exceeded the allowable limits of
warrantess searches. They had no probable cause to
believe that the accused violated any law except for
the tip they received. They did not observe any
peculiar activity from the accused that may either
arouse their suspicion or verify the tip. (Veridiano v.
People, 7 June 2017, Leonen, J.)

0.

Police received a radio message that a certain
pick-up with three people was carrying marijuana,
When the pick-up reached a checkpoint, the
police stopped and search the pick-up and found
marijuana therein. ls the marijuana admissible in
evidence against the accused?

A.

No. Search of a moving vehicle, while exempted from
the search-warrant requirement, still needs probable
cause. Search of a car based on a solitary tip is not
based on probable cause. Police cannot rely upon a

single, suspicious circumstance, Items seized inadmissible
because fruit of a poisonous tree (People v. Sison,
31 July 2019, Leonen, J.)

645

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
Q.

Police officers stopped a bus entering Davao City

at a check-point. All the male passengers were
asked to disembark. A police officer noticed a bag
at the rear end of the passenger seats. When he
lifted it, he noted that it was too heavy for its size.
He asked who the owner of the bag was and the
conductor pointed to the accused. The accused
was asked to board the bus and to open the bag
which he did. An unlicensed high-powered firearm
and a hand grenade were discovered inside.

Charged with illegal possession of firearm and
explosives, the accused objects to the admission
in evidence of the firearm and the grenade on the
ground that these were the fruit of an unlawful

search. Rule on the objection.
A.

Objection overruled. The prohibition of unreasonable
search and seizure ultimately sterns from a person's
night to privacy, Hence, only when the State intrudes
into a person's expectation of privacy, which society
regards as reasonable, is the prohibition triggered.
Conversely, where a person does not have an
expectation of privacy or one's expectation of privacy
is not reasonable to society, the alleged State intrusion
is not a "search" within the protection of the Constitution.
A bus is a public transportation vehicle where
passengers have a reduced expectation of privacy
and where a visual and minimally intrusive search is
reasonable and necessary to ensure public safety.
(Saluday v. People, 3 April 2018, e.b., Carpio, J.)

Q.

What are the guidelines laid down by the Supreme
Court in Saluday for the conduct of searches of
public transport buses and vehicles?

A.

Prior to entry, passengers and their bags and
luggages can be subjected to a routine inspection
akin to airport and seaport security protocol. In this
regard, metal detectors and x-ray scanning machines

646

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

can be installed at bus terminals. Passengers can
also be frisked, In lieu of electronic scanners,

passengers can be required instead to open their
bags and luggages for inspection, which inspection
must be made in the passenger's presence. Should
the passenger object, he or she can validly be refused
entry into the terminal,
While in transit, a bus can still be searched by
government agents or the security personnel of the
bus owner in the following three instances. First, upon
receipt of information that a passenger carries
contraband or illegal articles, the bus where the
passenger is aboard can be stopped en route to allow
for an inspection of the person and his or her effects.
This is no different from an airplane that is forced to
land upon receipt of information about the contraband
or illegal articles carried by a passenger onboard.
Second, whenever a bus picks passengers en route,
the prospective passenger can be frisked and his or
her bag or luggage be subjected to the same routine
inspection by government agents or private security
personnel as though the person boarded the bus at
the terminal. This is because unlike an airplane, a bus
is able to stop and pick passengers along the way,
making it possible for these passengers to evade the
routine search at the bus terminal. Third, a bus can be
flagged down at designated military or police
checkpoints where State agents can board the vehicle
for a routine inspection of the passengers and their
bags or luggages.

In both situations, the inspection of passengers
and their effects prior to entry at the bus terminal and
the search of the bus while in transit must also satisfy
the following conditions to qualify as a valid
reasonable search. First, as to the manner of the
search, it must be the least intrusive and must uphold
647

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

the dignity of the person or persons being searched,
minimizing, if not altogether eradicating, any cause for
public embarrassment, humiliation or ridicule. Second,
neither can the search result from any discriminatory
motive such as insidious profiling, stereotyping and
other similar motives. In all instances, the fundamental
rights of vulnerable identities, persons with disabilities,
children and other similar groups should be protected.
Third, as to the purpose of the search, it must be
confined to ensuring public safety. Fourth, as to the
evidence seized from the reasonable search, courts
must be convinced that precautionary measures were
in place to ensure that no evidence was planted
against the accused.
Aside from public transport buses, any moving
vehicle that similarly accepts passengers at the terminal
and along its route is likewise covered by these
guidelines. Hence, whenever compliant with these
guidelines, a routine inspection at the terminal or of
the vehicle itself while in transit constitutes a reasonable
search. Otherwise, the intrusion becomes unreasonable,
thereby triggering the constitutional guarantee under
Section 2, Article Ill of the Constitution.

The guidelines do not apply to privately owned
cars. Neither are they applicable to moving vehicles
dedicated for private or personal use, as in the case
of taxis, which are hired by only one or a group of
passengers such that the vehicle can no longer be
flagged down by any other person until the passengers
on board alight from the vehicle. (Saluday v. People,
3 April 2018, e.b, Carpio, J.).

648

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Q.

In the morning of 10 January 2014, a police officer
received a phone call from an anonymous person
stating that a certain male individual would be
transporting marijuana from Kalinga to the
province of Isabela. Later on the police station
received a text message giving the description of
the person who would be transporting the
marijuana in a blue sack and who would be on
board a passenger jeepney with a described plate
number, The police set up a check-point. The

described jeepney was stopped at the check-point
and the person matching the description (the
accused) was seen on board. He was asked if he
owned the blue sack in front of him and he said
he was. He was then asked to open the bag which
he did, Marijuana was found therein and the
accused was arrested. Was the marijuana admissible
in evidence?
A.

No While a warrantless search of a moving vehicle is
allowed, such are limited to routine checks where the
examination of the vehicle is limited to visual
inspection. In such a search, the target is the vehicle

and not a person on board the vehicle. Here, the target
of the search was not the jeepney but the accused
therein, Hence the search cannot be characterized as
a search of a moving vehicle.

An extensive and intrusive search, as opposed to
a routine search, is allowed if there is probable cause.
However, an unverified tip from an anonymous
informant does not engender probable cause that
warrants an extensive and intrusive search of a
moving vehicle.
The Supreme Court distinguished this case from
Saluday where the search was visual and minimally
intrusive and where the target of the search was the
bus and not a person aboard it. Moreover, there was

649

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
no allegation that the search was conducted with the
intent of ensuring public safety. The possession of
illegal drugs posed no threat to the passengers of the
jeepney, unlike in Saluday which involved possession

of an llegal high-powered firearm and a hand
grenade. (People v. Sapla, 16 June 2020, e.b.,
Caguioa, 4.).

0.

What are the remedies against an unlawful search

warrant?
A.

The remedies against an unlawful search warrant are:
(a) A motion to ouash the search warrant, and/or
(b) A motion to suppress evidence obtained by the
unlawful search warrant.
If no motion to suppress evidence was filed, the

aggrieved party may still object to the evidence so
obtained when the same is offered, invoking Sec.
3(2), Article Ill of the Constitution.
While the text of S14 R126 applies only to cases
where a search warrant was issued, albeit unlawful, it
is submitted that S14 R126 should be extended to all

cases of unlawful search and seizure (whether with
warrant or not) as covered in Sec. 3(2), Article Ill of
the Constitution.

G.

Boy Maton, a neighborhood tough guy, was
arrested by a police officer on suspicion that he

was keeping prohibited drugs in his clutch bag.
When Boy Maton was searched immediately after
the arrest, the officer found and recovered 10

sachets of shabu neatly tucked in the inner
linings of the clutch bag. At the time of his arrest,
rte tp concerned possession by Sapia of a high-powered frearr and
a hand grenade, even if unverified, it is opined that the search would be valid
pursuant to the Saluday guidelines.

650

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Boy Maton was watching a basketball game being

played in the town plaza, and he was cheering for
his favorite team. He was subsequently charged
with

illegal

possession

of dangerous

drugs,

and he entered a plea of not guilty when he
was arraigned.
During the trial, Boy Maton moved for the
dismissal of the information on the ground that
the facts revealed that he had been illegally
arrested. He further moved for the suppression of
the evidence confiscated from him as being the
consequence of the illegal arrest, hence, the fruit
of the poisonous tree.
The trial court, in denying the motions of Boy
Maton, explained that at the time the motions

wore filed Boy Maton had already waived the right
to raise the issue of the legallty of the arrest. The
trial court observed that, pursuant to the Rules of
Court, Boy Maton, as the accused, should have
assailed the validity of the arrest before entering
his plea to the Information. Hence, the trial court
opined that any adverse consequence of the
alleged illegal arrest had also been equally
walved. Comment on the ruling of the trial court.

(17 Bar Q19).
A,

The ruling of the court denying the motion for
dismissal of the information on the ground of illegal
arrest is proper. The ground of illegal arrest was
already waived when Boy Maton entered a plea
without filing a motion to quash on the ground that the
court had no jurisdiction over his person. (S9 R117)
However, the ruling denying the motion to
suppress is not correct. A waiver of an illegal,
warrantless arrest does not carry with it a waiver of
the inadmissibility of evidence seized during an illegal

651

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

warrantless arrest. (People v. Rach0, 3 Aug 2010) A
waiver of an illegal arrest is not a waiver of an illegal
search, (Villanueva v. People, 17 Nov 2014, Sereno,
C.J.). The evidence seized as a result of the illegal
arrest must be suppressed.
Q.

Where shall the motion to quash the search
warrant and/or to suppress evidence be filed?

A.

It shall be filed in and acted upon only by the court
where the action has been instituted.

If no criminal action has been instituted, the
motion may be filed in and resolved by the court that

issued the search warrant. However if such court
failed to resolve the motion and a criminal case is
later filed in another court, the motion shall be resolved
by the latter court. (S14 R126)
Q.

The NBI applied with the RTC of Makati City for
the issuance of a search warrant covering
documents and articles found at the offices of
Respondents. The NBl alleged that these documents
and articles were being used to (a) violate the
Securities Regulation Code, and (b) commit estafa
under Article 315 of the Revised Penal Code. The

court granted the application.
Subsequently the Respondents filed with the

RTC of Muntinlupa City a petition for prohibition
and injunction seeking to enjoin the NBI and the
SEC from using the seized items in prosecuting
them, Does the RTC of Muntinlupa have
Jurisdiction to entertain the petition for prohibition
and injunction?

652

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

A.

No. The motion to quash a search warrant and to
suppress evidence obtained thereby should be filed
with the issuing count (where the criminal action has
not yet been instituted) pursuant to S14 R126.

Here the petition for prohibition and injunction
that Respondents filed with the Muntinlupa RTC,
which seeks to prohibit the government agencies from

using the items seized under the search warrant, is
actually an action to suppress their use as evidence.
Hence, Mendoza should have filed it with the Makati
TC which issued such warrant. (SEC v Mendoza,
23 April 2012, Abad. J.).

0.
A.

Describe the procedural device of a motion to
suppress evidence.
Under American procedural Jaw, a motion to suppress

evidence is a motion, usually a pretrial one or a
motion in limine, the purpose of which is to prevent
the prosecution from using or presenting during the
trial illegally obtained evidence. The advantage of a
motion to suppress is that the evidence would not go
to the jury and would not have any prejudicial effect
against the movant. Furthermore, if the motion to
suppress evidence is granted, the defense may file a
motion to dismiss the criminal case for lack of
probable cause and thereby avoid the agony and
expense of a trial.

Under Philippine evidentiary law, the admissibility of
evidence may be assailed by objection only after it
has been offered in evidence. We have however
adopted the motion to suppress evidence with respect
to evidence obtained by virtue of an unlawful search
warrant. (S14 R126). Hence, the evidence may be
assailed even before the trial and even before a
criminal case is filed.
653

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q,

The search warrant authorized the seizure of
"undetermined quantity of shabu," During the
service of the search warrant, the raiding team
also recovered a kilo of dried marijuana leaves
wrapped in newsprint. The accused moved to
suppress the marijuana leaves as evidence for the
violation of Section 11 of the Comprehensive
Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002 since they were not
covered by the search warrant. The State justfified
the seizure of the marijuana leaves under the
"plain view" doctrine. There was no indication of
whether the marijuana leaves were discovered
and seized before or after the seizure ot the
shabu. If you are the judge, how would you rule
on the motion to suppress? (08 Bar 09).

A.

Ifl am the judge, I would grant the motion to suppress.
A search warrant should particularly describe the

things to be seized. (Section 2, Art. II, Constitution;
$2 R12) Any evidence obtained in violation of
Section 2, Art. Ill of the Constitution shall be
inadmissible for any purpose in any proceeding. (Sec.
3(2] Art. III, Constitution).
Here, the marijuana was not particularly described
or even mentioned in the search warrant. Hence, its
seizure was unlawful and it shall be inadmissible for
any purpose in any proceeding.
The "plain view" exception would not apply since
the marijuana was not in plain view since these were
wrapped in newsprint.

654

RULE 126
Search and Seizure

Q

May the question of whether or not there was
abuse in the enforcement of a search warrant be
raised in a motion to quash?

A.

No. In a motion to quash, what should be assailed is
the validity of the warrant's issuance, The manner of
serving the warrant and of effecting the search are not

proper issues in a motion to quash. The remedies
against such abuse are through appropriate penal,

administrative, or civil proceedings. (Kho v. Makalintal,

306 SCRA 70).

655

RULE 127. PROVISIONAL REMEDIES IN
CRIMINAL CASES
Q.

May provisional remedies be avalled of in a
criminal case?

A

Yes, the provisional remedies in civil actions, insofar
as they are applicable, may be availed of in
connection with the civil action deemed instituted with
the criminal action. (S1 R127), Necessarily it would
be the offended party who may avail of the same

against the accused
0.

May the offended party avail of the provisional
remedy of preliminary attachment against the accused?

A.

Yes. When the civil action is properly instituted in the
criminal action as provided in R111, the offended
party may have the property of the accused attached
as security for the satisfaction of any judgment that
may be recovered from the accused in the following
cases: (DEAN)
(a) When the accused is about to abscond from the
Philippines
(b) When the criminal action is based on a claim for
money or property embezzled or fraudulently
misapplied or converted to the use of the accused
who is a fiduciary, or for willful violation of duty.

(c) When the accused has concealed, removed, or
disposed of his property, or is about to do so.

656

RULE 127
Provisional Remedies in Criminal Cases

(d) When the accused resides outside the Philippines
(non-resident). (S2 R127) 17%

0.

Ina8P22case, may the private complainant avail
of preliminary attachment on the ground that the
check used to pay a pre-existing obligation bounced?

A.

It is submitted that the private complainant may do so,
even though fraud as a ground for attachment is not
mentioned in S2 R127, Please refer to the
immediately preceding footnote.

0.

An information for theft was filed against the
accused, The offended party did not reserve the
filing of the separate civil action. May the offended
party avail of the provisional remedy of replevin in
the criminal case?

A.

Yes. S1 R60 provides that the application for a writ of
replevin must be availed of before answer. While
there is no answer in a criminal case, this should not
mean that the provisional remedy of replevin is not
applicable in a criminal case. Otherwise, the offended
party would be deprived of the right to recover
possession of the personal property wrongly taken
during the pendency of the criminal case. It is
submitted that in the criminal case, the application for
a writ of replevin must be filed before plea, by way of
analogy to S 1 R60

ete that the grounds of [1] recovery of property unjustly taken; [2]
fraud, and [3] action against a party on whon summons may be served by
publication, which are found in S1 R57 are not found in S2 R127, It is submitted
however that the offended party in a criminal case can still avail of these grounds
insofar es the civil acton for the recovery of civil liability ls instituted in the
criminal case by virtue of S1 RR12', St and $2 R127 are not mutually repugnant
and may be reconciled wiht each cttar. It is suggested that S2 be eliminated
since St Rt27 in relation to S1 R57 already cover the case pf preliminary
attachment in criminal case6.

657

EVIDENCE

I

'

i

RULE 130. RULES OF ADMISSIBILITY
Q.

Define evidence.

A.

Evidence is the means, sanctioned by the Rules of
Court, of ascertaining in a judicial proceeding the truth
respecting a matter of fact. (S1 R128). Evidence also

refers to the medium used to prove the existence or

non-existence of a fact in issue.
Q.

Are the rules of evidence the same in all courts
and In all trlals and hearings?

A.

Yes, except as otherwise provided by law or by the
Rutes of Court ($2 R128) or by Supreme Court

issuances.
Q.

How is evidence classified according to its nature
or form?

A.

Evidence is classified according to its nature or form
as follows: (DOT)
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE. Writings or any

material offered as proof of their contents.
OBJECT (OR REAL) EVIDENCE. Evidence which

is directly addressed to the court's senses.
TESTIMONIAL EVIDENCE. Consists of the
statement of a witness offered to the court. Maybe
oral/live or by judicial affidavit.
Q.

How is evidence classified according to its relation
to the fact in issue?

A.

Evidence is classified according to its relation to the
fact in issue as follows:

661

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
DIRECT EVIDENCE. That which proves the fact

in issue without the aid of any inference or presumption
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE. That which proves

the fact in issue by way of inference or presumption.
Q.

Distinguish cumulative evidence from corroborative
evidence.

A.

Cumulative evidence is evidence of the same kind
and to the same state of facts, while corroborative
evidence is additional evidence of a different character to
the same point. (2 REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 435 [6" rev. ed.]). More often however

this fine distinction between cumulative and corroborative
evidence is not observed in law and in practice and
corroborative evidence is defined or taken to mean as
additional evidence to the same point, whether of the

same or different kind.

For instance "corroborative

evidence" in Section 28 of the Rules on Examination
of a Child Witness, which refers to the act or
declaration of a child declarant as an exception to the
hearsay rule, should be interpreted in the broad rather
than in the strict sense.
Q.

Distinguish prima facie evidence from conclusive
evidence.

A.

Prima facie evidence is that which by itself is sufficient
to prove a fact but which may be rebutted by contrary
evidence, while conclusive evidence is one which
may not be rebutted or contradicted.

Q.

Distinguish positive evidence from negative evidence.

A.

Evidence s positive when the witness affirms that a
fact dio or did not occur, while negative evidence is
when the witness states he did not see or know of the
occurrence of a fact. (2 REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 436 [6" rev. ed.])
662

RULE 130
Rules of Admissibility

Q.

When is evidence admissible?

A.

Evidence is admissible when it is relevant to the issue
and is not excluded by the Constitution, the law, or by
the Rules of Court. (S3 R128). Or to Illustrate it by
way of a formula: ADMISSIBILITY= RELEVANCY +
COMPETENCY,

Q.

May a court over the relevant objection admit
inadmissible documentary evidence [in this case,
violative of the original document rule) "for whatever
they are worth"?

A.

No. Inadmissible evidence cannot have any probative
value at all. (Buencamino v. People, 10 November
2020, Caguioa, J.)

Q.

When is evidence relevant?

A.

Evidence is relevant when it has a relation to the fact

in issue as to induce belief in its existence or nonexistence.
In civil cases, a fact in issue is one which was
raised in the pleadings of the parties. In criminal
cases, a fact in issue is one which will establish
whether or not the accused is liable or guilty for the
offense as charged in the information.
Even if a fact tends to prove a matter
determinative of the case but the matter was not put
in issue, evidence of such fact is not admissible since
it is not relevant. In civil cases the proponent however
may avail of S5 R10.
Q.

Distinguish between relevant and material evidence

A.

In certain states in the U.S, a distinction is drawn
between relevant and material evidence: evidence is
relevant when it tends to prove or disprove a matter
determinative of the case (although the matter may

663

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
not have been put in issue) while evidence is material
when it tends to prove or disprove a fact in issue. In
Philippine evidentiary law, there is no such distinction
because our rule definition of relevant evidence is the
same as the American definition of material evidence.
Q.

What are collateral matters?

A.

Collateral matters are those which have no direct
connection to the fact in issue, Thus in a suit on a
promissory note by P against D, the fact that D did not
pay A in a prior loan is a collateral matter.

O.

ls evidence on collateral matters allowed?

A.

No except when it tends in any reasonable degree to
establish the probability or improbability of the fact in
issue (S4 R128), In other words, the existence or nonexistence of the fact in issue is inferred by induction
from the collateral matter. Hence evidence of the
accused's pacific nature may be adduced by the
defense in a murder charge where the accused had
pleaded self-defense.

Competency
Q.

Discuss the concept of competency of evidence.

A.

Even if the evidence is relevant, but it is excluded by
the law or by the Rules of Court, the evidence would
be inadmissible. Otherwise put, evidence must not
only be relevant but it must also be competent.
Competency rules are based on public policy considerations
which override the relevancy of the evidence.

Q.

Where are exclusionary rules found?

A.

Exclusionary rules are present in the Rules of Court,
for example those relating to the various disqualification
rules and privileges, and in Supreme Court issuances,

664

RULE 130
Rules of Admissibility

for instance the Rule on Examination of a Child
Witness. They may also be found in the Constitution
such as under Sections 2 and 3, Article III (right
against unreasonable search and seizure, right to
privacy of communication and correspondence),
Section 12, Article III (rights of person under custodial
investigation), Section 17, Article Ill (right against selfincrimination), and in statutes, such as the AntiWiretapping Law (R.A. No. 4200)
Q.

A sued for annulment of his marriage with B.
During trial, A offered In evidence cassete tapes
of alleged telephone conversations of B with her
lover. The tapes were recordings made by tapping
A's telephone line, with A's consent and obviously
without B's or her lover's. B vehemently objected
to their admission, on the ground that neither B
nor her lover consented to the wire tap, The court
admitted the tapes, ruling that the recorded
conversations are nonetheless relevant to the
issues involved, Was the court correct in
admitting the cassete tapes in evidence? Explain.
(96 Bar Q15-5).

A.

No, the court was not correct in admitting the tapes in
evidence.
Evidence in order to be admissible must be both
relevant and competent. Here the evidence of the
telephone conversations although relevant were not
competent since these are excluded under the AntiWiretapping Law (RA. No, 4200)
Under the Anti-Wiretapping Law, it shall be
unlawful for any person not being authorized by all the
parties to any private communication or spoken word,
to tap any wire or cable, or by using any other device
or arrangement, to secretly overhear, intercept, or
record such communication or spoken word. Any
665

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
communication or information obtained in violation of

the law shall not be admissible in evidence in any
judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or administrative
hearing or investigation.
Q.

In a disbarment case, introduced in evidence

against the respondent was a birth certificate
showing that he had fathered children by hls
mistress. The respondent invokes Article 7 of P.D.
No. 603 which provides that the birth records of a
person shall be kept strictly confidential and that
no information thereto shall be disclosed except
on request of the person himself or of a court or
proper government official and which punishes
with imprisonment and/or fine any unauthorized

disclosure. ls the birth certificate admissible

in evidence?
A.

Yes. Article 7 of P.D. No. 603 only provides for
sanctions against persons violating the rule on
confidentiality of birth records, but nowhere does it
state that procurement of birth records in violation of
said article would render said records inadmissible in
evidence. On the other hand, the Revised Rules of
Evidence only provides for the exclusion of evidence
if it is obtained as a result of illegal searches and
seizures. It should be emphasized, however, that said
rule against unreasonable searches and seizures Is
meant only to protect a person from Interference by
the government or the state. Consequently, in this
case whore complainants, as private individuals,
obtained the subject birth records as evidence against
respondent, the protection against unreasonable
searches an seizures does not apply.

Since both Article 7 of P.O. No. 603 and the
Revised Rules on Evidence do not provide for the
exclusion from evidence of the birth certificates in
question, said public documents are, therefore, admissible
666

RULE 130

Rules of Admissibility

and should be properly taken into consideration in the

resolution of this administrative case against respondent.
(Tolentino v. Mendoza, 440 SCRA 519 [2004] cited in
De Jesus v. Sanchez-Malit, 8 July 2014).
Q.

Plunder cases were filed against former President
Estrada before tho Sandiganbayan. The prosecution
moved for the issuance of a subpoena duces
tecum directed to Equitable Bank and Urban Bank

to produce the records relative to Trust Account
No. 858 and Savings Account No. 0016-17345-9.
Estrada moved to quash the subpoena duces
tecum. Estrada contends that the Information
found therein, given their "extremely detailed"

character, could only have been obtained by the
prosecution through an illegal disclosure by the
bank officials concerned. Estrada thus claims that
the subpoenas must be quashed following the
"fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine. Is Estrada's
argument correct?
A.

No. The exclusionary rule is inapplicable. R.A. No.
1405 nowhere provides that an unlawful examination
of bank accounts shall render the evidence obtained
therefrom inadmissible in evidence. Section 5 thereof
only provides for criminal liability to the violator.
Hence the subpoenas cannot be quashed. (Ejercito v.
Sandiganbayan, 30 November 2006, Carpio
Morales, J.)

Q.

Define documentary evidence.

A.

Documentary evidence consists of writings, recordings,
photographs or any material containing letters, words,
sounds, numbers, figures, symbols, or their equivalent, or
other modes of written expression offered as proof of
their contents. Photographs include still pictures,

667

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
drawings, stored images, x-ray films, motion pictures
or videos. (S2 R130, as amended by the 2020
Amendments to the Revised Rules on Evidence).'
Q.

What is the meaning of "recording" under S2
R130?

A.

A "recording" consists of letters, words, numbers, or
their equivalent recorded in any manner. (See FRE
1001[b]). Under S2 R130 as amended by the 2020
amendments, recording includes "sounds." Hence a

recording of a conversation, speech, or other oral
communication Is considered as documentary evidence.
Johns v, United States, 323 F.2d 421 (5th Cir, 1963),
cited in the Notes of the Advisory Committee to the
FRE (2019).
Q.

What is the meaning of "photographs" under S2
R130?

A.

A "photograph" means a photographic image or its
equivalent stored in any form (FRE R1001[c]) offered

as proof of their contents. Photographs include still
pictures, drawings, stored images, x-ray films, motion
pictures or videos. (S2 R130 as amended by the 2020
amendments). Hence a CCTV footage of a person
robbing a bank is considered as a photograph included
in the definition of documentary evidence.
Q

A witness was presented on the stand to testify
that he saw the accused robbing the bank and
that he also saw a CCTV footage of the accused
robbing the bank. The defense counsel objected
to the portion of the testimony regarding the

' re

2020 Amendments to the RRevised Rules on Evidence refer to the
2019 Proposed Amendments to the Revised FRules on Evidence which were
approved by the Supreme Court and which took effect on 1 Mey 2020, For
brevity, these amendments are referred to as the 2020 amendments. The
amendod rules on evidence are referred to as the 202O Rules or Evidence

668

RULE 130

Rules of Admissibility

CCTV footage saying that the best evidence or the

original document is the footage. Should the
objection be sustained?

A.

No. If a witness is presented on the stand to identify
the photograph or motion picture as a correct
representation of events which he saw or of a scene
with which he is familiar, he adopts the picture as his
testimony, or, in common parlance, uses the picture
to illustrate his testimony. Under these circumstances,
no effort Is made to prove the contents of the picture,
and the original document rule is inapplicable.
(Paradis, The Celluloid Witness, 37 U.Colo.L. Rev.
235, 249-251 [1965])

Q.

May a document be offered as object evidence?

A.

Yes. If the document is offered not as proof of its
contents but of its existence or physical condition or
features, then it is considered as object evidence,
Hence marked money used in a buy bust operation
and offered to prove the buy-bust is object evidence.
A paper containing the handwriting of a person, offered
as a handwriting exemplar, is an object evidence.

0.

Milagros, the Plaintiff's wife, forged Plaintiff's
signature in a special power of attorney purportedly
authorizing Milagros to sell their conjugal land.
Armed with the forged SPA, Milagros sold the
land to the Defendant Tan. The price Indicated In
the deed of sale was P200,000. According to the
Defendant, what he really paid was P700,000 but
Milagros had requested the price to be understated
in order to save on taxes, The trial court nullified
the sale and ordered Milagros and Plaintiff to
return the purchase price of P200,000 to the
Defendant. On appeal, the Defendant argues that
the trial court erred in relying on the consideration
669

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

stated in the deed of sale as basis for the
reimbursable amount because a null and void
document cannot be used as evidence. Is the
Defendant correct?
A.

No. While the terms and provisions of a void contract
cannot be enforced since it is deemed inexistent, it
does not preclude the admissibility of the contract as
evidence to prove matters that occurred in the course
of executing the contract, ie., what each party has
given in the execution of the contract. The deed of
sale as documentary evidence may be used as a
means to ascertain the truthfulness of the consideration
stated and its actual payment. The purpose of
Introducing tho deed of sale as evidence is not to
enforce the terms written in the contract but to
determine what each party has given under the void
contract to allow restitution and prevent unjust enrichment.
(Tan v. Hosana, 3 February 2016, Brion, J.).

Q.

When a rule of evidence refers to the term writing,
document, record, instrument, memorandum or
any other form of writing, does such term include
an electronic document?

A,

Yes. An electronic document is a functional equivalent

of a paper-based document. (S1
Electronic Evidence).

670

R3 Rules on

ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RULE (S3-8 R130)
Q.

What ls the original document rule?

A.

The original document rule provides that when the
subject of inquiry is the contents of a document,
writing, recording, photograph or other record, no
evidence is admissible other than the original document
itself. (S3 R130 as amended by the 2020 amendments).

The rule was formerly known as the best evidence
rule prior to the 2020 amendments. The 2020
amendments have adopted the more precise term
"original document rule."
Q.

The prosecution witness testified that he saw a
CCTV footage of the accused robbing the bank.
The defense counsel objected on the ground of
the original document rule. The prosecutor
argued that the CCTV footage is not a document
since it is not a writing, Should the defense
counsel's objection be sustained?

A.

Yes. Photographs, which includes motion pictures or
videos, are expressly Included in the definition of
documentary evidence under S2 R130 and in the
original document rule under S3 R130 of the 2020
Rules on Evidence

Q.

ls there a different original document rule for
electronic documents?

A.

In the main, no longer, Formerly there was a
bifurcated approach to the original document rule:
one for non-electronic documents under the Rules of
Court and another for electronic documents under
Rule 4 of the Rules on Electronic Evidence (REE)
The key distinction was that under the REE, duplicates
were considered as the equivalent of the original. (S2

671

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
R4, REE). The 2020 amendments in the main provide
for a uniform approach to the original document rule
when it also adopted the rule in S2 R4 of the REE by

providing that a "duplicate is admissible to the same
extent as the original."
Q.

Mr. Carrascoso took an Air France flight from
Manila to Rome. While on a stop-over in Bangkok,
he was forcibly transferred from the first class to
the tourist class in order to make way for "a white
man," Mr. Carrascoso resisted his transfer and a
commotion occurred on board the plane. The
purser recorded the incident in his notebook. Mr.
Carrascoso sued Air France. During the trial, Mr.
Carrascoso testified that after his forcible transfer
to the tourist class, the purser told him that he
(the purser) had recorded the incident in his
notebook and then read out the entry to him:
"First-class passenger was forced to go to the
tourist class against his will, and the captain
refused to Intervene." Air France's counsel moved
to strike out the statement on the ground that the
original evidence would be the notebook. Should
the court grant the motion to strike out?

A.

No, the court should not grant the motion to strike out.
The original document rule applies when the
subject of inquiry is the contents of the document.
Here the subject of inquiry is not the contents of

the notebook, but the purser's statement to Mr.
Carrascoso, Otherwise put the original document rule
applies only to documentary evidence but not to
testimonial or oral evidence. The purser's statement
was not written but oral in form. (Air France v.
Carrascoso, 18 SCRA 155)

672

Original Document Rule ($3-8 R130)

Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co. and
designated W as the beneficiary, The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed by
a written notice designating the new beneficiary
sent by the insured and received by X Insurance
Co. before the death of the insured. After the
death of H, Q demanded from X Insurance Co. the
proceeds of the policy, claiming that she had
been designated as the beneficiary by H as may
be seen from a copy of a written notice signed by
H and allegedly received by X Insurance Co.
before H's death.
Q sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X
Insurance Co. raises the defense that it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required
written notice changing the beneficiary from W to
Q. At the trial, Q did not produce the copy of the
written notice supposedly received by X Insurance
Co. Instead, Q merely presented R who testified
that shortly before H's death, H had instructed R
to write to X Insurance Co. to that effect.

R's testimony was objected to on the grounds
that it was In violation of the original document
rule, the original document being the written
notice. Rule on the objection,'

A.

The objection that R's testimony was in violation of
the original document rule should be overruled, The
original document rule applies only to documentary
evidence. Testimony by R on what H had told him to
do is not testimony on documentary evidence. (See
Air France v. Carrasco0so, 18 SCRA 155)

yoothatcal is based on Question 9a of the 1978 Remedial Law Bar Earn

673

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEOIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

At the trial of Ace for violation of the Dangerous

Drugs Act, the prosecution offers in evidence
a photocopy of the marked P100.00 bills used In
the "buy-bust" operation. Ace objects to the
introduction of the photocopy on the ground that

the Best Evidence Rule prohibits the introduction
of secondary evidence in lieu of the original.
1)

ls the photocopy real (object) evidence or

documentary evidence?
2)
A.

ls the photocopy admissible in evidence? (94
Bar 09).

1) The photocopy ls real (object) evidence because

the same is being offered not to prove the contents of
the marked money but to prove its existence and use
in the "buy-bust' operation
2) The photocopy is admissible in evidence.

The objection that the introduction thereof would
violate the Best Evidence Rule does not lie since the
best evidence rule does not apply to object or real
evidence. (People v. Tandoy, 192 SCRA 28)."
Q.

Police officers arrested Mr. Druggie In a buy-bust
operation and confiscated from him 10 sachets of
shabu and several marked genuine peso bills
worth P5,000.00 used as the buy-bust money
during the buy-bust operation.
At the trial of Mr. Druggie for violation of R.A.
No, 9165 (Comprehensive Dangerous Drug Act of

2002), the Prosecution offered in evidence, among
others, photocopies of the confiscated marked

under the 202G Rules on Evidence a photocopy is the equivalent of
the original

674

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

genuine peso bllls. The photocopies were offered
to prove that Mr. Druggie had engaged at the time
of his arrest in the illegal selling of dangerous drugs.
Invoking the Best Evidence Rule, Atty. Maya
Bang, the defense counsel, objected to the
admissibility of the photocopies of the confiscated
marked genuine peso bills. Should the tria judge
sustain the objection of the defense counsel?
Briefly explain your answer. (17 Bar Q13)
A.

No, the trial judge should not sustain the objection of
the defense counsel.
In a case involving similar facts, the Supreme
Court held that the offer in evidence of the
photocopied marked money did not violate the best
evidence rule since such a rule applies only to
documentary and not to object evidence.

Here the marked money was offered not to prove
the contents thereof but to prove the fact that Mr.
Druggie had sold the illegal drugs to the poseurbuyer. (People v. Tandoy, 192 SCRA 28)
Q.

Prosecution of O for kidnapping. Prosecution
witness W testifies that he received a ransom
note. D objects on the ground that the original
evidence is the note itself. Should the objection
be sustained?

A.

No. The Original Document Rule does not apply if
what is being testified to is not the contents of a
document but the fact of receipt of a document. But if
W will testify on the terms or contents of the note, D can
object on the ground of the Original Document Rule.

675

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Under the original document rule, what is regarded
as the original?

A.

An "original" of a document is the document itself or
any counterpart intended to have the same effect by a
person executing or issuing it. An "original" of a
photograph includes the negative or any print
therefrom. If data is stored in a computer or similar
device, any printout or other output readable by sight
or other means, shown to reflect the data accurately,
is an "original." (S4[b] R130, as amended by 2020
amendments).

Q.

What is a duplicate?

A.

A "duplicate" is a counterpart produced by the same
impression as the original, or from the same matrix, or
by means of photography, including enlargements
and miniatures, or by mechanical or electronic rerecording, or by chemical reproduction, or by other
equivalent techniques which accurately reproduce the
original. (S4[b] R130 as amended by the 2020
amendments) A "duplicate" means a counterpart produced
by a mechanical, photographic, chemical, electronic,
or other equivalent process or technique that
accurately reproduces the original. (FRE 1001[e])

Q

Proponent presents in evidence a photocopy of a
letter written by the adverse party without
accounting for the non-production of the original
letter. The adverse party objects on the ground of
the original document rule. Should the objection
be sustained?

A.

No, the objection should be overruled. A photocopy is
a duplicate since it is a counterpart produced by
photography which is a technique which accurately
reproduces the original. (See S4[b] R130).

676

Original Document Rule ($3-8 R130)

Under S4(c) R130, "[a] duplicate is admissible to
the same extent as an original unless (1) a genuine
question is raised as to the authenticity of the original,
or (2) in the circumstances, it is unjust or inequitable
to admit the duplicate in lieu of the original.
Under the former Best Evidence Rule, the
objection would have been sustained since a photocopy
is considered as secondary evidence.
Q.

What are the exceptions to the original document
rule?

A.

The exceptions to the original document rule In which
evidence other than the original document is
admissible to prove the contents of the document are;

(COCLAP)
C-Original is in the custody or control of the adverse
party and he falls to produce it after reasonable

notice.
O-The original cannot be obtained by local judicial
process or procedures.
C- The original is not related to a controlling issue.
L. The original is lost or destroyed, or cannot be
produced in court without bad faith on the part of
the offeror.
A- Original consists of numerous accounts or other
documents which cannot be examined ln court
without great loss of time and the fact sought
to be established is only the general result of
the whole.

p. Original is a public record in the custody of a
public officer or is recorded in a public office. (S3
R130, as amended by the 2020 Rules)

;

677

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

C- The original is not closely related to a controlling
issue.

Trial court's discretion to dispense with production
of original

0.

At issue was whether or not President Joseph
Estrada resigned from the presidency, Presented
in support of the contention that Estrada resigned
were the excerpts from the Angara Diary in which
Estrada stated, "Pagod na pagod na ako. Ayoko
na, masyado nang masakit. Pagod na ako sa red
tape, bureaucracy, sa intriga. l just want to clear
my name, then I will go." Estrada objected to the
introduction of the excerpts on the ground that
the best evidence is the Angara Diary Itself. Is the
objection meritorious?

A.

No. The SC adopted Wigmore's comment that production
of the original may be dispensed with, in the trial
court's discretion, if the opponent does not bona fide
dispute the contents of the document and no other
purpose will be served by requiring production.
Here Estrada did not bona fide dispute the contents of
the excerpt even though he was in a position to do so.
(Estrada v. Desierto, 356 SCRA 108 [2001))

use/u

Q.

Petitioner Concepcion Chua and Respondent Suy
Ben Chua are the children of the late Chua Chin.
Upon the demise of Chua Chin, his spouse and

his children executed a deed of partition Wherein
they waived their shares over the Hagonoy Lumber
in favor of their co-heir Chua Sioc Han. Chua Sioc

Han then sold the Hagonoy Lumber to Respondent.
Later Respondent delivered a check for P200,000
to Petitioner which the latter encashed. Subsequently
Respondent sued Petitioner to collect on the
P200,000 which the Respondent alleges was a loan.
678

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

In her answer with counterclaim, Petitioner
alleged that the P200,000 was an advance on
her share in Hagonoy Lumber and counterclaimed
for accounting and delivery of her share.
Respondent filed an answer to the counterclaim
wherein he alleged that Petitioner no longer had
any interest in Hagonoy Lumber because of the
execution of the deed of partition and that he is
now the owner of the Hagonoy Lumber by virtue
of a deed of sale executed in his favor by Chua
Sioc Han, Respondent annexed copies of the
deed of partition and of sale to his Answer to the
Counterclaim. Petitioner filed an unsworn reply
and countered that the deed of partition and the
deed of sale were not true and valid agreements
and did not express the true intention of the
parties, and that the deeds were only temporary
paper arrangements executed upon advice of
counsel until all the heirs could reach a final
agreement. The trial court ruled in favor of
Respondent. Petitioner contended that it was
error for the trial court to admit mere copies of the
deed of partition and the deed of sale in violation
of the best evidence rule, ls the Petitioner's
contention correct?

A.

No the Petitioner's contention is not correct.
The Supreme Court has held in Gaw v. Chua,
G.R No. 160855, 16 April 2008, that production of the
original may be dispensed with in the trial court's
discretion whenever the opponent does not bona fide
dispute the contents of the documents and no other
useful purpose will be served by requiring production.
Here there was no dispute as to the terms of
either deed; hence the TC correctly admitted the
photocopies in evidence. Petitioner admitted signing
the deed of partition. As for the deed of sale,

679

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Petitioner in effect admitted the genuineness and due

execution of the deed of sale when she failed to
specifically deny it pursuant to S8_R8. The Petitioner
did not contest the contents of the deeds but simply
alleged that there was a contemporaneous agreement
that the transfer of Hagonoy Lumber to Chua Sioc
Huan was only temporary.
Note: Although Petitioner was not a party to the
deed of sale between Chua Sioc Huan and Respondent
and therefore is not required to deny it under oath,
she must still specifically deny its genuineness and
due execution. This Petitioner failed to do and so she
impliedly admitted the same pursuant to S8 R8.

Loss, destruction, or inability to produce original
0.

What is secondary evidence under the original
document rule?

A.

Secondary evidence is that, other than the original
document or an equivalent thereof, which may be
used to prove the contents of a document where the
case falls within any of the exceptions to the original
document rule.

0.

What is the secondary evidence when the original
document is lost or destroyed, or cannot be
produced In court without bad faith on the part of
the offeror?

A.

Upon proof of the execution or existence of the
original and the cause of its unavailability, the offeror
may prove its contents by a copy, or by recital of its
contents in some authentic document, or by the
testimony of witnesses in the order stated. (S5 R130).

680

Original Document Rule ($3-8 R130)

Q.

Is there an order of priority in the use of
secondary evidence under S5 R1307

A.

Yes. S5 R130 states that the offeror may prove the
original document by a copy, a recital, or by testimony
of witnesses "in the order stated." This means that
before the offeror may resort to a recital, he must first
show that a copy is unavailable, and before he may
resort to testimonial evidence, he must first show that
a copy and a recital are unavailable.

Q.

What is the proper foundation for the Introduction
of secondary evidence in the case of loss,
destruction, or inability to produce the original?

A.

The offeror must show: (EUR)
1)

Proof of the execution
document.

pr existence of the

2)

Proof of the cause of its unavailability, without
bad faith on his part. (S5 R130)

3)

Proof of reasonable diligence and good faith on
the part of the offeror in the search for or attempt
to produce the original. (Citibank v. Teodoro, G.R.
No. 150905, 23 September 2003)

Q.

The original document was lost because of the
offeror's negligence. May he use secondary evidence
to prove the contents of the original document?

A.

Yes. S5 R130 states that secondary evidence may be
introduced by the offeror "upon proof of its execution
or existence and the cause of its unavailability without
bad faih
t on his part." (Italics supplied). This means
that it is bad faith, not negligence, which would preclude
the offeror from using secondary evidence.

681

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Ajax Power Corporation, a utility company, sued
in the Regional Trial Court to enforce a supposed

right of way over a property owned by Simplicio.
At the ensuing trial, Ajax presented its retired field
auditor who testified that he knew for a fact that a
certain sum of money was periodically paid pursuant
to a written contract. The original contract was not
presented. Instead, a purported copy, identified by
the retired field auditor as such, was formally
offered as part of his testimony, Rejected by the

trial court, it was finally made the subject of an
offer of proof by Ajax. Can Ajax validly claim that
it had sufficiently met its burden of proving the
existence of the contract establishing its right of
way? Explain. (92 Bar 13).

A.

No, Ajax cannot validly claim that it had sufficiently
met its burden of proving the existence of the contract
establishing its right of way
Under the Best Evidence Rule, before a party
may introduce secondary evidence of an original
document, he must first lay the foundation by proving
the execution or existence of the original document.
Here Ajax's field auditor testified only as to the
payment of a certain sum of money pursuant to a
contract but did not positively state that there was an
original contract of right of way in the first place.
Hence the copy was inadmissible in evidence,
(Manila Electric Company v. IAC, G.R. No. 71393, 28
June 1989)

Q.

Defendant was a cardholder of Citibank Mastercard.
When Defendant uses the credit card in purchasing
from a merchant, triplicates were produced of the
sales invoice, although the cardholder signed the
sales invoice only once. One copy was for
Citibank, another to the merchant, and another to

682

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

the defendant cardholder, Citibank subsequently
sued Defendant for unpaid credit card debts.
During the trial, Citibank offered in evidence
photocopies of the sales invoices or charge slips
to prove the obligation of the defendant. Citibank's
assistant manager testified that he had requested
the originals from Equitable Credit Card Network,
Inc. but this request was not acted upon by
Equitable. Defendant objected to the introduction
of the photocopies for being violative of the best
evidence rule. How should the court rule on the
objection? Explain.
A,

The court should sustain the objection.
The Supreme Court has held that there should
be reasonable diligence and good faith in the search
for or attempt to produce the original.
Here the original sales invoices might have been
found by Equitable. Hernandez testifying that he had
requested the originals from Equitable, failed to show
that he had subsequently followed up the request.
Moreover when more than one original exists, it
must appear that all of them have been lost,
destroyed, or cannot be produced In court before
secondary evidence can be given of any one, A
photocopy may not be used without accounting for the
other originals.
Each of the triplicates is considered an original in
accordance with S4(b) R130. Citibank failed to show
that all three originals were unavailable, and that due
diligence had been exercised in the search for them.
(Citibank v. Teodoro, G.R. No. 150905, 23 September
2003).°

'yen the photoopes of the sales invies/charge slips were offered in
evidence, the Rules on Electronic Evidence {etf. 1 August 2001) had not yet

683

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co. and
designated W as the beneficiary. The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed by
a written notice designating the new beneficiary
sent by the insured and received by X Insurance
Co, before the death of the insured, After the
death of H, Q demanded from X Insurance Co. the
proceeds of the policy, claiming that she had
been designated as the beneficiary by H as may
be seen from a copy of a written notice signed by
H and allegedly received by X Insurance Co.
before H's death.
Q sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X
Insurance Co. raises the defense that it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required written
notice changing the beneficiary from W to O. At
the trial, Q did not produce the copy of the written
notice supposedly received by X Insurance Co.
Instead, Q merely presented R who testified that
shortly before H's death, H had Instructed R to
write to X Insurance Co. to that effect and that
shortly thereafter, and before H's death, R
received in the mail a card from X Insurance Co.
on which was written "Acknowledge receipt of
notice of change of beneficiary from W to Q" but
that the card had been mistakenly thrown away.

R's testimony was objected to on the ground
that it in violation of the best evidence rule, the
best evidence being the card bearing the
acknowledgment of receipt. Rule on the objection."

taken effect. Under the REE he sales invoices or charge slips would have been
considered as electronic documents and hence the photocopies thereof would be
the equivalent of the original
ypathetic.al based on Question 9a of the 1978 Remedial Law Bar Exam

684

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

A.

Objection sustained. In order for secondary evidence
in the form of testimonial evidence to be admitted, the
proponent should have laid the basis therefor pursuant to

$5 R130.
Here while R's testimony that the card was
mistakenly thrown away may have been adequate to
existence of the card and its subsequent loss or
unavailability, his testimony did not show that a copy
of the card or an authentic recital thereof was also
unavailable. Hence the objection should be sustained.

0.

What is the proper foundation for the Introduction
of secondary evidence in the case where the
original is In the custody or control of the party
against whom the evidence is sought to be offered?

A.

The offeror must show: (ER)
1)

Proof of the existence of the document.

2)

Proof of reasonable notice to produce to tho
adverse party and failure to produce.

Q.

P filed against D an action for the recovery of a
stock certificate wrongfully obtained and withheld
by D. P offered in evidence a photocopy of the
stock certificate. O objected on the ground of the
best evidence rule and stated that no notice to
produce the original was given to him. P counters
that a notice to produce is not necessary where
the nature of the action is in itself a notice and
where the document has been wrongfully obtained
or withheld by the adverse party. How should the
court rule on D's objection? Explain,

A,

The court should sustain D's objection.

685

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL. LAW
VOLUME II

The provision in the former S6 R130 which
states that the notice to produce is not necessary
where the writing is itself a notice, or where it has
been wrongfully obtained or withheld by the adverse
party has been deleted in the present S6 R130.
Q.

What is the secondary evidence in the case of the
exception under S3(c) R13 regarding numerous
accounts?

A.

The contents of the numerous accounts or documents
may be presented in the form of a chart, summary, or
calculation.
The originals shall be available for examination

or copying, or both, by the adverse party at a
reasonable time and place. The court may order that
they be produced in court. (S7 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence).

0.

What is the condition precedent for the admission
of a summary of numerous documents under
3(c) R1307

A.

The trial court may admit a summary of voluminous
original documents, in lieu of origiral documents, if
the party has shown that the underlying writings are
numerous and that an in-court examination of these
documents would be inconvenient. In other words,
S3(c) R130 does away with the item-by-item court
identification and authentication of voluminous
exhibits which would only be burdensome and tedious
for the parties and the court.
However, as a condition precedent to the
admission of a summary of numerous documents, the
proponent must lay a proper foundation for the
admission of the original documents on which the
summary is based The proponent must prove that
686

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

the source documents being summarized are also
admissible if presented in court. In concrete terms,
the source documents must be shown to be original,
and not secondary. Furthermore, the source documents
must likewise be accessible to the opposing party so

that the correctness of the summary of the voluminous
records may be tested on cross-examination and/or

may be refuted in pleadings. In ordinary trial-type
proceedings, a proper foundation for the introduction

of a summary may be established through the
testimony of the person who is responsible for the
summary's preparation, or the person who supervised
the preparation of the summary. Furthermore, when a
party invokes S3(c) R130, he does not similarly
invoke S3(a), (b), and/or (d), R130. He does not
likewise claim that the original documents have been
lost or destroyed. The party merely asserts that the
numerous documents cannot be examined in court
without great loss of time and that the fact sought to
be established from these documents is only the
general result of the whole,
Whenever a party seeks an exemption under the
best evidence rule pursuant to S3(c) R130, he asks
permission from the trial court to produce a summary
of numerous documents, whose originals are
available to the adverse party for inspection. He does
not ask permission from the trial court to present in
evidence the numerous non-original documents.
Otherwise, the very purpose of S3(c) R130 would be
defeated. In that case, every exhibit of non-original
documents would be identified, authenticated, and
cross-examined, leading to a tedious and protracted
litigation. Thus, if a party desires to present
photocopies of the original documents, he must first
establish that the presentation of photocopies is justified

687

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
under S3(a), (b), and/or (d), R130. He must establish
the presence of all the elements under these provisions.
(Republic v. Mupas, 8 September 2015, e.b., Brion, J.).
Thus in a case, the SC said that it could not give
any weight to a summary of costs prepared by an
auditing firm, since the firm did not state in its
summary that it examined the original documents
allegedly proving the costs. Although a 'compliance"
was later submitted, the same merely consisted of
photocopies whose presentation was not shown to be
justified under S3(a)(b) and/or (d) of R130. (Id.).

0.

What is the secondary evidence in case where the
original is a public record?

A.

The contents of the public record may be proved by a
certified copy issued by the public officer in custody
thereof

Public record or recorded in a public office
Q.

Respondent offered in evidence, Exhibit H, a
photocopy of a deed of sale. On the photocopy is
a stamped notation signed by an assessment officer
in the local assessor's office which states that the
photocopy is a "certified true xerox copy," The
petitioner objected to the offer on the ground that
it violates the best evidence rule but the trial court
overruled the objection and admitted the
photocopy. Was the admission of the photocopy
in evidence proper?

A.

No, on two grounds.

First the attestation made by the assessment
officer is defective for it did not state "that the copy is
a correct copy of the original." (See $25 R132).

688

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

Second the assessor's office is not the official
repository of original notarized deeds of sale and
could not have been the legal custodian contemplated
in the rules. It is the notary public or the proper court
that has custody of his notarial register that could
have produced the original or a certified true copy
thereof. (Heirs of Gabatan v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 150206, 13 March 2009)

a.

PCGG on behalf of the Republic filed a complaint
for reversion against former President Marcos.
Upon his death he was substituted by his heirs.
During the trial, the PCGG presented certified true
photocopies of Pantranco's articles of incorporations,

memorandum

of

agreement,

and

purchase

agreement. The PCGG also presented a photocopy
of the proceedings before the PCGG. These were

objected to by respondents on the ground that
they violate the best evidence rule, Petitioner
contends that these documents fall within the
exception under S3(d) R130, that is, these documents
are public records in the custody of a public
officer or are recorded in a public office. It Is its
theory that since these documents were collected
by the PCGG, then, necessarily, the conditions for
the exception to apply had been met. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

Yes. The fact that Pantranco's articles of incorporations,
memorandum of agreement, and purchase agreement
were collected by the PCGG in the course of its
investigation of the Marcoses' alleged ill-gotten wealth
do not make the same public records within the purview
of S3() and S7 R130 as well as S19(c) R132.

hr decision did not expound on why the articles of incorporation, etc.,
were not pubic documents under S3(d) R130. It is submitted that applying the
ieirs of Gabatan ruling, the PCGG may not be considered as the legal custodian
of such documents as it is not an official repository thereof

689

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

As to the copy of the TSN of the proceedings
before the PCGG, while It may be considered as a
public document under S19(a) R132 since it was
taken in the course of the PCGG's exercise of its
mandate, it was not attested to by the legal custodian
to be a correct copy of the original, This omission falls
short of the requirement of S24 and $25 R132.
(Republic v. Marcos-Manotoc, G.R N. 171701, 8

February 2012).
Q.

Plaintiff filed case against Defendant. A document

needed by Plaintiff to prove his case is in the
possession of X, but despite the issuance of a
subpoena duces tecum, the document could not
be obtained because the subpoena could not be

served on X whose whereabouts are unknown.
May the Plaintiff introduce secondary evidence in
lieu of the original document?
A,

Yes, The 2020 Rules introduced another exception to
the original document rule, that is, when the original
cannot be obtained by local judicial processes or

procedures.
Q.

Explain the exception where "[t]he original is not

closely related to a controlling issue."
A.,

This essentially refers to the situation wherein the
contents of the document are not the subject of
inquiry Thus in a case wherein the parties do not dispute
the terms of a contract, the issue being whether there
was a breach of the contract, secondary evidence of
such contract is admissible.

690

Original Document Rule (S3.-8 R130)

Best Evidence Rule Under The REE

0.

What are the Rules on Electronic Evidence?

A.

The Rules on Electronic Evidence (REE) are those
rules applicable whenever an electronic document is
offered or used in evidence.

Q.

When did the REE take effect?

A.

Th REE took effect on 1 August 2001.

Q.

What are the cases covered by the REE?

A,

The REE shall apply to all criminal and civil actions
and proceedings, as well as quasi-judicial and
administrative cases. (S2 R1 REE).

0.

Police officers invited suspect Enojas to come
with them aboard their car. Later the police got
involved in a firefight at a 7.-11 store in which one
gunman and one officer was killed. In the confusion,
Enojas disappeared but left his cell phone in his
cab. Officer Cambi got the cellphone and
pretending to be Enojas was able to cause the
entrapment and arrest of the suspects in the
killing. Enojas was himself arrested. The accused
were charged with murder. The text messages
sent to the phone recovered from the tal driven
by Enojas clearly made references to the 7-11
shootout and to the wounding of "Kua Justin,"
one of the gunmen, and his subsequent death.
The context of the messages showed that the
accused were members of an organized group of
taxicab drivers engaged in illegal activities. May
the transcript of the text messages be used in
evidence against the accused?

gsc. Resolution dated 24 September 2002 (effective 14 October 2002)
oxpanded the coverage of the REE to criminal actions and proceedings,

691

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

Yes. As to the admissibility of the text messages, the
Regional Trial Court admitted them in conformity with
the Court's earlier Resolution applying the Rules on
Electronic Evidence to criminal actions. (A.M. No. 017-01-SC, Re: Expansion of the Coverage of the Rules

on

Electronic

Evidence,

September

24,

2002,

effective 14 October 2002). Text messages are to be
proved by the testimony of a person who was a party

to the same or has personal knowledge of them.
Here, PO3 Cambi, posing as the accused Enojas,
exchanged text messages with the other accused in

order to identify and entrap them. As the recipient of

those messages sent from and to the mobile phone in
his possession, PO3 Cambi had personal knowledge

of such messages and was competent to testify on
them. (People v. Enojas, 10 March 2014), (Note: The
pronouncement as to the inclusion of criminal actions
and proceedings in the coverage of the REE cleared

up doubts engendered by Ang v, People, G.R. No.
182835, 20 April 2010, where the Supreme Court in
an obiter stated that the REE does not apply to
criminal actions).
Q.

What is an electronic document?

A.

An electronic document is defined in the REE as
information or the representation of information, data,
figures, symbols or other modes of written expression
by which a right is established or an obligation
extinguished, or by which fact may be proved, which
is received, recorded, transmitted, stored, processed,
retrieved, or produced electronically. (S1((h) R2,
REE). It includes digitally signed documents and print-

outs. (ld.)

692

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

Q.

What ls an electronic data message?

A.

An electronic data message refers to information
generated, sent, received or stored by electronic,
optical or similar means. (S1(g), R2, REE). For purposes
of the REE, the term "electronic document" may be
used interchangeably with "electronic data message."
(S1(h) R2, REE)

Q.

Give examples of electronic documents.

A.

Examples of electronic documents are emails,
recorded or saved text messages, and computergenerated documents. A document which is scanned
is also an electronic document.

0.

State the rule on admissibility
documents. (03 Bar Q19a)

A.

An electronic document is admissible in evidence if it
complies with the rules on admissibility prescribed by

of electronic

the Rules of Court and related laws and is
authenticated in the manner prescribed by the Rules
on Electronic Evidence, (S2 R3 REE).
0.

What is the original of an electronic document?

A

An electronic document shall be regarded as the
equivalent of an original document under the Best
Evidence Rule if it is a printout or output readable by
sight or other means, shown to reflect the data
accurately (S1 R4 REE), The image of an electronic
document shown in the monitor is an original, as well
as the printout thereof,

693

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

ls acopy or duplicate considered an equivalent of
the original under the REE?

A.

Yes under the

REE,

copies or duplicates are

considered as the equivalent of the originals. (S2 R4,

REE). Thus a photocopy of an email printout is
admissible without accounting for the non-production
of the original.
Under the 2020 amendments, the best evidence
rule under the REE is substantially similar to the
original document rule under the Rules of Evidence.

Q.

What is a copy or a duplicate?

A.

The following are considered as copies or duplicates:

1)

DUPLICATE ORIGINALS. When a document is in

two or more copies executed at or about the
same time with identical contents, or
2) COUNTERPART.

When

a

document

is

a

counterpart produced by the same impression as
the original, or from the same matrix, or by mechanical or
electronic re-recording, or by chemical reproduction, or by
other equivalent techniques which accurately
reproduces the original (IMMECE). A photocopy is a

counterpart and hence equivalent to the original.
Q.

When is a copy or duplicate not admissible to the
same extent as the original?

A.

A copy or a duplicate shall not be admissible to the
same extent as the original if; (AU')
a genuine question is raised as to the authenticity
of the original; or

in the circumstances it would be unjust or
inequitable to admit the copy in lieu of the
original. (S2 R4, REE)

694

Original Document Rule (S3-8 R130)

Q.

ls the Best Evidence Rule under the Rules on
Electronic Evidence applicable to non-electronic
documents?

A,

A perusal of S2 R4 REE would indicate that it applies

to electronic and non-electronic documents as the
term "electronic document" is not used therein. Indeed
FRE 1001(4) and 1003," from which S2 R4 REE was
substantially copied, applies to all kinds of documents
without distinction. Prof. Jesus M. Disini Jr, writes that

"Section 2 [R4] is a substantial amendment to the
Best Evidence Rule that affects even paper-based
documents." (JESUS M. DISINI, JR., THE RULES ON
ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE 20 [1 ed., 2001)).

However in MCC Industrial Corporation v.
Ssangyong Corp., G.R. No. 170633, 17 October
2007, the Supreme Court held that the best evidence
rule under the REE does not apply to non-electronic
documents.

With the 2020 amendments, the question has
become moot since the 2020 amendments adopted
the rule in the REE that duplicates are the equivalent
of the original.
Q.

A.

Are
text
messages
communications?

ephemeral

electronic

Yes (S1(k)R2, REE). Once saved or recorded however

they become electronic documents and are thus
subject to the original document rule.

"ere 'FRE 1001(4) is shorthand for the United States Federal Rules of
Evidence, Saction 1001(4)

695

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Do evidentiary rules on documents (such as the
original document rule and the parol evidence
rule) apply to electronic documents7

A.

Yes. Whenever a rule of evidence refers to the term
writing, document, record, instrument, memorandum
or any other form of writing, such term shall
be deemed to include an electronic document.
(S1 R3, REE).

696

PAROL EVIDENCE RULE
Q.

What is the parol evidence rule?

A.

It is the rule which provides that once the terms of an
agreement have been reduced to writing, it is
considered as containing all the terms agreed upon

and there can be, between the parties and their successors
in interest, no evidence of such terms other than the
contents of the written agreement. (S1 O R130).
Q.

What are the reasons behind the parol evidence rule?

A,

The reasons behind the parol evidence rule are the
following:
Under the Integration Rule, it is presumed that
the parties to a written contract intended it to integrate
all the terms of their agreement.

The rule is also intended to give stability to
written contracts and to remove the possibility and
temptation of perjury.
Q.

What is parol evidence?

A.

Parol evidence is any evidence, whether oral or
written, outside of the written agreement, which is
offered to modify, explain or add to the terms of the
written agreement. (ANTONIO RR. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 36 [2004 ad.))

Q.

Distinguish the parol evidence rule from the
statute of frauds under Article 1403 of the Civil
Code.

A.

AS TO SCOPE. The parol evidence rule covers all
written agreements while the Statute of Frauds covers
only the agreements mentioned in Article 1403 of the
Civil Code.

697

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
AS TO PRESENCE OF WRITTEN AGREEMENT.
In the parol evidence rule, there is a written
agreement, while in the Statute of Frauds, there is no
written agreement.
AS TO ENFORCEABILITY OF CONTRACT. In

the parol evidence rule, there is an enforceable
agreement, while in the statute of frauds there is no
enforceable contract.

AS TO PURPOSE. In the parol evidence rule,
the purpose is to bar parol evidence to modify,
explain, or add to the terms of the written agreement,
while in the statute of frauds, the purpose is to bar a

party from proving certain agreements by oral evidence.
AS TO NATURE OF EVIDENCE BARRED. In
the parol evidence rule, what is barred may either be
oral or written evidence, while in the statute of frauds,
what is barred is oral but not written evidence.
Q.

Does the parol evidence rule apply to all kinds of
written documents ?

A.

No. The parol evidence rule applies only to written
contracts. Thus a receipt which is merely proof of
payment is not covered by the rule. A will ls
considered a written agreement for purposes of the
parol evidence rule,

Q.

Leoncia, who was illiterate, sold a parcel of land

to her cousin Victoria. Leoncia thumbmarked a
document which Victoria told Leoncia was a deed
of sale of Lot A, although the deed actually
described Lot B.
At the trial of a case filed by
Victoria to recover Lot B from its present
possessor, the defendant called Leoncia to testify
for him that what she really intended to sell and

698

Parol Evidence Rule

understood as having sold to Victoria was Lot A.
Victoria objected to the testimony on the ground
that it would violate the parol evidence rule.
Should Victoria's objection be sustained?
A.

No. The parol evidence rule applies only to the parties
to the contract and their successors-in-interest. Here
the one offering the parol evidence (the defendant in
the action for recovery filed by Victoria) was a stranger
to the deed of sale. Hence he is not bound by the
parol evidence rule. (Lechugas v. Court of Appeals,
143 SCRA 355),

Q.

Six siblings are co-owners of a parcel of land.
Four of the siblings sold their shares in the land
to Ygonia in a deed of sale, while the remaining
two (Petitioners) did not. Petitioners contend that
while not Indicated in the deed of sale, there was
an oral undertaking on the part of Ygona to survey
the lands, segregate the Petitioners' portion, and
deliver certificates of title to them, as part of the
consideration of the sale. Ygofa argues that
Petitioners cannot prove such undertaking as it
would violate the parol evidence rule, Petitioners
counter that the parol evidence rule does not
apply to them since they are strangers to the deed
of sale, May Petitioners introduce evidence of
Ygona's oral undertaking to them?

A.

No, since this would violate the parol evidence rule.
Assuming the truth of the oral undertaking, that would
make the Petitioners beneficiaries of a stipulation
pour autrui under Article 1311 of the Civil Code. A
beneficiary of a stipulation pour autrui obviously
bases his claim on the contract. He therefore cannot
claim to be a stranger to the contract and resist the
application of the parol evidence rule. (Pacres v:
Ygora, 5 May 2010, Del Castillo, 4.)

699

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Does the parol evidence rule apply to both private
and public documents? Does it apply to written
agreements which are signed by only one party or
to unilateral agreements?

A.

The parol evidence rule applies to written contracts be
they private or public documents. The contract need
not be signed by both parties nor need it be bilateral.
(Inciong v. CA, 257 SCRA 578).

Q.

Are there exceptions to the parol evidence rule?

A.

Yes. A party may present parol evidence to modify,
explain, or add to the terms of the written agreement if
he puts in issue in his verified pleading: (VISA)
1) The validity of the written agreement;
2) The failure of the written agreement to express the
true intent and agreement of the parties thereto;

3)

The existence of subsequent terms, i.e., terms
agreed to by the parties or their successors in
interest after the execution of the written
agreement; or

4)

An intrinsic ambiguity, mistake, or imperfection
(AIM) in the written agreement._(S10 R130 as
amended by 2020 amendments)

Q.

How are the exceptions to the parol evidence rule
put in issue?

A.

In Ortaez v. Court of Appeals, 266 SCRA 561, the
Supreme Court stated that the existence of an exception
to the parol evidence rule must be "squarely presented
as an issue" or otherwise expressly averred. The
pleading, for example, should state that the contract

' re amendment consisted of putting 'verified' before "pleading"

700

Paro! Evidence Rule

"failed to express the true agreement of the parties"
not merely that "the sale was subject to four conditions."
An implicit averment is not sufficient.
Q.

Explain and discuss the exception where the validity
of the written agreement has been put in issue,

A.

This exception is based on the fact that if the written
agreement is void, there is no written agreement
which would be subject of the parol evidence rule.
Hence if it is alleged that a deed of donation is void
for being a donation mortis causa which did not
comply with the formalities of a testamentary disposition,
parol evidence may be adduced to show the mortis
causa nature of the donation,

0.

Explain and discuss the exception regarding the
failure of the written agreement to express the
true intent and agreement of the parties.

A,

This exception is based on the reason that if the
written agreement failed to express the parties· true
intent and agreement, it would be anomalous to bar
parol evidence showing the parties' true intent and
agreement. In such a case, the court should be empowered
to ascertain the true intent and agreement.

The exception is not inconsistent with the
principle that the written agreement contains all the
terms agreed upon since here what is alleged is that
the written agreement at the outset failed to express
the parties' true Intent and agreement.
For instance in a deed of sale with right of
repurchase over a parcel of land, the vendor in the
deed may allege that the true intent and agreement of
the parties is not to transfer ownership over the land
but to constitute a mortgage over the same in favor of
the vendee.

701

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

a.

Rudlin Corporation entered into a contract with
Financial Building Corporation (FBC) for the latter
to construct a school building. Disputes arose
between the parties as to the date of completion
and the amounts payable under the construction
agreement. FBC filed an action for collection
against Rudlin. In its answer, Rudlin averred that
the construction agreement did not reflect the
true contract price agreed upon, which is p6
million; that the amount of P6.9 million, which is
FBC's bid price, was indicated in the agreement
solely for the purpose of obtaining a higher
amount of loan from BPI; that the execution of
said document was made with the understanding
between FBC and Rudlin that the contract price
stated therein would be decreased to a mutually
acceptable contract price; and that, however, due
to inadvertence, the parties forgot to sign an
agreement fixing the true contract price. Rudlin
invoked the exception to the parol evidence rule
under S10(b) R130 wherein the written agreement
failed to express the true intent of the parties.
May Rudlin invoke S10(b) R130?

A.

No. S10(a)(b) R130 is available only where the written
contract is so ambiguous or pbscure that the parties'
contractual in,ention cannot be understood from a

mere_readin of the instrument. Here there is no
ambiguity or obscurity as to the contract price.
(Financial Building Corp. v Rudlin International Corp.,
4 October 2010, Villarama, J, RCBC v Bernardino, 21
September 2016; Republic v. Roque, 10 October 2016;
Spouses Agbada v. Inter-Urban Developers, Inc.
G.R. No. 144029, 19 September 2002: Heirs of Del
Rosario v. Santos, 194 Phil, 671 [(1981]).

702

Parot Evidence Rule

Q.

Pedro filed a complaint against Lucio for the
recovery of a sum of money based on a promissory
note executed by Lucio. In his complaint, Pedro
alleged that although the promissory note says
that it ls payable within 120 days, the truth is that
the note is payable immediately after 90 days but
that if Pedro is willing, he may, upon request of
Lucio give the latter up to 120 days to pay the
note. During the hearing, Pedro testified that the
truth is that the agreement between him and Lucio
is for the latter to pay immediately after ninety
day's time. Over the objection of Lucio, will Pedro
be allowed to testify as to the true agreement or
contents of the promissory note? Why? (01 Bar
Q16a ed).

A.

No. The exception to the parol evidence rule under

$10(b) R130 ls available only where the written
contract is so ambiuous or obscure that the parties'
contractual intention cannot be understood from a
mere reading pf the instrument. Here there is no
ambiguity or obscurity as to the period of payment
which is 120 days. (Financial Building Corp. v. Rudlin
International Corp., 4 October 2010, Villarama, J.;
Spouses Agbada v. Inter-Urban Developers, Inc., GR
No. 144029, 19 September 2002; Heirs of Del Rosario
v. Santos, 194 Phil. 671 [1981])
Q.

Jose Gamir-Consuelo Diaz Heirs Association, Inc.
(respondent) is a duly incorporated corporation
composed of the heirs of Jose Gamir and
Consuelo Diaz. It was the registered owner of a
parcel of land with an area of 1,836 square meters
covered under TCT No. T-7550.
On 9 August 2005, after a series of negotiations,
respondent and the Republic of the Philippines
(petitioner), through the Department of Public
Works and Highways (DPWH), executed a Deed of
703

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Absolute Sale where it was agreed that respondent

would sell the above-mentioned

property to

petitioner in consideration of P275,099.24. The
property was eventually registered in petitioner's
name under TCT No. T-390639 after respondent's
receipt of the full consideration.
On 15 November 2006, respondent filed a
Complaint before the RTC. It alleged that the
subject parcel of land was taken by the DPWH
sometime in 1957; the value of P275,099.24 as just
compensation stated in the Deed of Absolute
Sale, was based on the value of the property in
1957; it made verbal and written demands to
petitioner for the payment of interest from 1957;
and it had a right to receive interest because the
DPWH had not paid just compensation when It
occupied the property in 1957, ls the respondent
entitled to such interest?
A.

No. The award of legal interest in cases where the
government acquires private property through
voluntary sale is not a matter of law. Unlike in cases
where the state exercises its power of eminent
domain or a party initiates expropriation proceedings
and other similar actions, in negotiated sale, there ls
an existing contract that governs the relations of the
parties and determines their respective rights and
obligations. In turn, these contractual stipulations should
be complied with in good faith, unless they are contrary to
law, morals, good customs, public order or public
policies. Hence, the laws relating to contracts should
govern in case of controversy in their application.
Under S10 RR130, when the terms of an
agreement have been reduced to writing, it is
considered as containing all the terms agreed upon.
In the present case, it is undisputed that the Deed of
Absolute Sale between petitioner and respondent

704

Paro!l Evidence Rule

does not contain any provision regarding the payment
of interest. Petitioner agreed to convey its property
upon full payment of the purchase price without
reservation for any claim of interest. No parol
evidence can be admitted to support respondent's
claim of interest because it never put in issue in its
complaint the ambiguity or validity of the Deed of
Absolute Sale, or its failure to reflect the parties' true
intention. (Republic v. Gamir-Consuelo Diaz Heirs
Assoc. Inc., 12 Nov 2018, Reyes, J.).
Q.

Explain and discuss the exception regarding
subsequent terms,

A.

Parol evidence may be introduced to prove the
existence of other terms agreed to by the parties or
their successors-in-interest after the execution of the
written agreement
The reason for the exception is evident:
a
written agreement does not preclude the parties from
entering into any subsequent agreement modifying or
altering the first written agreement. To hold otherwise
would be to in effect say that a wnitten agreement
cannot be amended or modified thereafter.

Q.

Explain and discuss the exception
intrinsic ambiguity.

A.

Intrinsic ambiguity, also known as latent ambiguity,
refers to an ambiguity wherein a word or phrase is
susceptible of two or more meanings. Parol evidence
would then be admissible to determine the parties'
intention for the court in such a case would simply be
construing or interpreting the contract, not changing it
or making a new contract for the parties.

705

regarding

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Give examples of intrinsic or latent ambiguity.

A.

The phrase "capacity of 6,000 liters" used in connection
with a contract for the sale of a distilling apparatus.
There was an ambiguity on whether the capacity
referred to is receiving capacity or producing capacity.
(Palanca v. Wilson & Co., 37 Phil, 306). Parol
evidence rnay be received on the matter.

"Dollars" in a contract could mean the currency
of the United States or Hong Kong or Australia. (2

FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
455 [6" rev. ed., 1989]) Parol evidence may be
received to clarify the currency intended by the parties.
In a will, where the devisee is named as "my
friend Juan Dela Cruz" but the testator has two friends
by the name of "Juan Dela Cruz." Parol evidence may
be adduced to prove the Juan Dela Cruz adverted to
in the will.
Q.

What is meant by extrinsic or patent ambiguity?

A.

Extrinsic or patent ambiguity Is synonymous with
vagueness, and refers to the situation where a word
or phrase has no definite meaning at all or is not
susceptible of any definite meaning. In such a case,
parol evidence is not admissible to cure the lack of
meaning for the court in such a case would not merely
be construing the contract but making a new contract
for the parties.

Q.

Give examples of extrinsic or patent ambiguity.

A.

A contract of sale refers to the subject matter as "a
parcel of land in BF Resort, Las Pi\as City." Parol
evidence is not admissible to prove the parcel of land
being referred to,

706

Parol Evidence Rule

A deed of donation which provides thus: "L
donate one of my diamond rings to Maria Clara Ortiz."
Paro! evidence is not admissible to determine what
diamond ring was intended to be donated,
Q.

Explain the meaning of mistake as an exception to
the parol evidence rule.

A.

Mistake refers to an error in the drafting or wording of
the written agreement which changes the intended
meaning thereof
The mistake must be mutual to both parties or
must have been occasioned by the fraudulent or
inequitable conduct (MFI) of one of the parties.
Otherwise the court cannot admit parol evidence to
prove a mistake. This is because the courts cannot as
a rule step in and refuse to enforce a contract on the
mere ground that a party made a mistake in entering
into the contract.

Q.

Explain the meaning of imperfection as an exception
to the parol evidence rule.

A.

"Imperfection" refers to an inaccurate statement, or
incompleteness in the writing, or the presence of
inconsistent provisions in the agreement. (2 FLORENZ

D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM
454 [6" rev. ed., 1989]) For instance if one part of
the lease agreement states that the contract is subject
to automatic renewal if not terminated while another
part states that the contract will expire on a fixed date,
parol evidence is admissible to prove what the parties
really intended regarding the lease period.

707

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May a vendee introduce parol evidence that a
deed of absolute sale of land was subject to the
suspensive condition that the vendor would first
obtain a right of way to the land?

A.

No. Under the parol evidence rule, once an agreement
has been reduced to writing, it is considered as

containing all the terms agreed upon and there can be
no evidence of such terms other than the written
agreement. In Ortanez v. Court of Appeals, supra, the
Supreme Court clarified that parol evidence of
conditions precedent may be admitted only when the
document mentions such condition or refers to an

agreement containing such condition.
Q.

X was hired by Philoil Co. as General Manager for

its oil exploration venture in Palawan. The
employment contract expressly provided that X
was to receive a salary of Pt0,000 a month plus
representation and travelling expenses of PS,000
a month. Philoil Co. failed to pay and so X filed an
action for specific performance of the employment
contract. At the trial, Philoil Co. attempted to
prove, by oral testimony, that the payment of
salary to X was subject to the condition that
Philoil Co.'s exploration in Palawan was already
successful. ls such oral testimony admissible?
Reasons. (78 Bar Q10a).
A.

No, such oral testimony is not admissible. Under the
parol evidence rule, once an agreement has been
reduced to writing, it is considered as containing all
the terms agreed upon and there can be no evidence
of such terms other than the written agreement. In
Orta/ez v. Court of Appeals, 266 SCRA 561, the
Supreme Court clarified that parol evidence of
conditions precedent may be admitted only when the
document mentions such condition or refers to an
agreement containing such condition.

708

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

James sued PNB for damages claiming that PNB
had unlawfully withdrawn the money from his
certificate of time deposit. PNB alleged that it had
set-off the deposit for due and demandable loans
obtained by James from PNB and which were
evidenced by promissory notes (PNs). James
testified that he had pre-signed the PNs for future
loans which were never released to him. He did
not present corroborative testimony on this point.
Nevertheless the RTC ruled in favor of James
holding that aside from the testimony of a bank
officer, no other evidence was offered to show
that the proceeds of the loans were released to
James. May James' testimony overcome the terms of
the PNs which James signed "for value received"?

A.

No. To overcome the presumption that the written
agreement contains all the terms of the agreement,
the parol evidence must be clear and convincing and
of such sufficient credibility as to overturn the wntten
agreement.
In this case, James' uncorroborated allegation
that the loan documents were merely pre-signed for
future loans is far from being the clear and convincing
evidence necessary to defeat the terms of the written
instrument. Thus, there is no reason to deviate from
the terms of the loan as appearing on the PNS.
Consequently, the trial and appellate courts erred
when they considered James' unsubstantiated claim
over the terms of the promissory note and ruled that
PNB failed to prove James' receipt of the loan
proceeds. (Phi.l Natinal
o Benk v. Cua, 18 April 2018,
Martires, J.)

709

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Distinguish between the original document rule
and the parol evidence rule.

Q.

A.
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT
RULE

PAROL EVIDENCE RULE

Applies to all
documentary evidence,

Applies only to written
contracts (except wills)

Original is not

Original is available in court.

-------

available in court,
Rule of preference, i.e.,

Rule of exclusion: parol or

secondary evidence may
be offered if foundation for
introduction laid.

extrinsic evidence barred.

Purpose of the secondary
evidence is to prove the

Purpose of the parol evidence
ls to modify, explain,

contents of a written
document

or alter the terms
of the written contract.

Bars any proponent even if

Does not bar a proponent
who is not a party to the
written contract.

he is not a party to
the document.
Can be invoked by nonparties to the document.
Q.

I

Can be Invoked only by a party

to the written contract.

___J

P sues D for recovery of Lot 1, In his complaint, P
avers that Lot 1 was sold to him by S. D offers in
evidence a deed of sale between S and P which
states that what was sold to P was Lot 2. May P
testify over a parol-evidence objection by D that
what was really intended to be sold was Lot t and
that the indication of Lot 2 was just a clerical error?

710

Parol Evidence Rule

A,

Yes. The parol evidence rule may be invoked only by
a party to the written contract. This can be gleaned
from S10 R130 which states that "there can be,
between the parties and their successors in interest,
no evidence of such terms other than the contents of
the written agreement." Here D was not a party to the
written contract. Hence D cannot invoke the parol
evidence rule and thus P should be allowed to testify
on the matter.

Q.

X sues Y for reconveyance of a parcel of land on
the ground that the deed of sale executed by in
favor of Y does not express the true agreement
between them. At the trial of the case, X sought to
prove by parote" evidence that their real agreement
was merely on mortgage. Y objected to this
testimony of X on the ground that the document of
sale is the best evidence. Should the objection of
Y be sustained? Reason. (76 Bar Q4b)

A.

No, the objection of Y on the ground that the document of
sale is the best evidence should be overruled.
Under the Best Evidence Rule, the evidence

which is barred is secondary evidence which seeks to
prove the contents of a document. Here what X seeks
to prove is not the contents of the document of sale
but on the contrary that the terms thereof did not
express the true intent of the parties. Hence the
objectior on the ground of the best evidence rule is
misplaced and should be overruled.

e This should read as parol

711

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The relevant objection that Y should have raised

is the parol evidence rule. However his failure to
timely raise this objection means that the same was
waived. Even if the objection were timely raised, the

same would still have been overruled. One of the
exceptions to the parol evidence rule is when
the written contract fails to express the true intent of
the parties.
Here the allegation of X is that the written
contract fails to express the true intent of the parties
that the contract is one of mortgage rather than sale.
Hence an objection based on the parol evidence rule
would still have been overruled.

712

OBJECT EVIDENCE
Q.

What is object evidence?

A.

Object evidence is that which is directly addressed to
the senses of the court like tangible things exhibited
or demonstrated in open court. Unlike testimonial and
documentary evidence, the evidence is directly perceived
by the court without any intervening medium, i.e., the
document or the witness. This class of evidence is
referred to by Wigmore as evidence by autoptic
preference, ie., by proferring or presenting in open
court the evidentiary articles for the observation or
inspection of the court. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 434 16" rev. ed.])

Q.

What are the kinds of object evidence?

A.

Object evidence may be classified into three:
a) Objects that have readily identifiable marks like a
particular painting or a car with a plate number;
b)

Objects that are readily made identifiable like a
hammer which is similar to other hammers of the
same make but on which an identifying mark, hike
a scratch or etching is made.

c) Objects which are not readily identifiable nor can
be made readily identifiable, like drops of blood,
hair, drugs, and
(WILLARD RIANO, EVIDENCE:
THE BAR LECTURE SERIES 148 [2009])

soil.

Q.

What ls the chain of custody?

A.

Chain of custody is the method of authenticating
object evidence, especially object evidence of the
third kind, by showing its movement and location from
the time it was obtained until the time it is offered in
evidence.
713

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

O.

Define chain of custody in drug cases.

A.

The chain of custody rule provides that the links in the
chain of custody of the seized drug, from seizure to
presentation in court, must remain unbroken. The

four interconnected links are the following:
1) The seizure and marking of the illegal drug recovered
from the accused by the arresting officer,
2) The turnover of the drug to the by the arresting
officer to the investigating officer.

3)

The turnover by the investigating officer of the
drug to the forensic chemist for laboratory
examination.

4) The turnover and submission of the marked drug
to the court. (People v. Burdeos, 17 July 2019,
Lazaro-Javier, J.).

Every person who takes possession of seized
drugs must show how it was handled and preserved
while it remains in his or her custody to prevent any
switching or replacement. (Id.).
Q.

What shall the apprehending team having initial
custody and control of the drugs do immediately
after its seizure?

A.

The apprehending team having initial custody and
control of the dangerous drugs. controlled precursors
and essential chemicals, instruments/paraphernalia
and/or laboratory equipment shall, Immediately after
seizure and confiscation, conduct a physical inventory
of the seized items and photograph the same in tho
presence of the accused or the person/s from whom
such items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her
representative or counsel, with an elected public
official and a representative of the National Prosecution
714

Parol Evidence Rule

Service or the media who shall be required to sign the
copies of the inventory and be given a copy
thereof: Provided, That the physical inventory and
photograph shall be conducted at the place where the
search warrant is served; or at the nearest police
station or at the nearest office of the apprehending
officer/team, whichever is practicable, in case of
warrantless seizures: Provided, finally, That noncompliance
of these requirements under justifiable grounds, as
long as the integrity and the evidentiary value of the
seized items are properly preserved by the
apprehending officer/team, shall not render void and
invalid such seizures and custody over said items.
(Sec. 21, paragraph 1, Article Il of R.A. No. 9165, as
amended by R.A. No. 10640 which was approved on
15 July 2014)
Q.

Will non-compliance with Sec. 21, paragraph 1,
Article ll of R.A. No. 9165 render void the seizure
of and custody over the drugs?

A.

No, provided that the non-compliance is under
justifiable _rounds and as long as the integrity and
evidentiary value (JI) of the seized items are properly
preserved by the apprehending officer/team. (Sec.

21[a], Art. II of the Implementing Rules of R.A.No, 9165).
Q

What shall the apprehending team having Initial
custody and control of the drugs do immediately
after its seizure?

A.

The apprehending team having initial custody and
control of the dangerous drugs, controlled precursors
and essential chemicals, instruments/paraphernalia
and/or laboratory equipment shall, immediately after
seizure and confiscation, conduct a physical inventory
of the seized items and photograph the same in the
presence of the accused or the person/s from whom
such items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her

715

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME

representative or counsel, with an elected public
official and a representative of the National Prosecution
Service or the media who shall be required to sign the
copies of the inventory and be given a copy
thereof: Provided, That the physical inventory and
photograph shall be conducted at the place where the
search warrant is served; or at the nearest police
station or at the nearest office of the apprehending
officer/team, whichever is practicable, in case of
warrantless seizures: Provided, finaly, That noncompliance
of these requirements under justifiable grounds, as
long as the integrity and the evidentiary value of the
seized items are properly preserved by the
apprehending officer/team, shall not render void and
invalid such seizures and custody over said items
(Sec. 21, paragraph 1, Article II Of R.A. No. 9165, as
amended by R.A. No. 10640 which was approved on
15 July 2014)
The 2 witnesses required in Sec. 21 Of RA 9165
must be present at the inventory which must be done
immediately after the arrest. "Calling them in" to the
inventory at the police station is not compliance with
Sec. 21. (People v. Galuken, 17 July 2019, Caguioa,
People v. Lea10, 28 July 2020, Lazaro-Javier, J.)

J.,
0.

Does Sec. 21 of R.A. RA 9165 require that the DOJ
representative be from the DOJ itaelf7

A.

No. The representative could be from an attached
agency, like the Bureau of Immigration. (People v
Tamil Selvi Veloo, 4 March 2021, Peralta, C.J.).

716

Parol Evidence Rule

SPECIAL KINDS OF EVIDENCE
Q.

What is ephemeral electronic communication?

A.

Ephemeral electronic communication refers to phone
talks, text messages, chatroom sessions, streaming
audio and video (PTC SS), and other electronic forms
of communication the evidence of which is not
recorded or retained. (S2(k) R2, REE).
If the communication is recorded by audio, photo
or video means, then it becomes audio, photo or
video evidence. If recorded by electronic or optical
means, then the communication becomes an electronic
document. Thus a text message which is saved
becomes an electronic document.

Q.

Whenever a rule of evidence refers to a writing,
document, record, Instrument, memorandum or
any other form of writing (WIRD MO), would such
term be deemed to include an electronic document?

A.

Yes. (S1 R3, REE). For evidentiary purposes, an
electronic document shall be the functional equivalent
of a written document under existing laws. (Id., Sec.
7, Electronic Commerce Act).

Q.

What is DNA?

A.

DNA is the abbreviation for deoxyribonucleic acid. It
is the chain of molecules found in every nucleate cell
of the body. The totality of an individual's DNA is unique
for the individual, except identical twins.

Q.

When may a court order DNA testing?

A.

The appropriate court may, at any time, either motu
proprio or on application of any person who has a
legal interest in the matter in litigation, order a DNA
testing after hearing and notice where the following
are shown (BN SNO):

717

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

a) A biological sample exists that is relevant to the case.
b) The biological sample:
(l) was not previous!z subjected to the type of
DNA testing now requested; or
(ii) was previously subjected to DNA testing but
the results may require confirmation.

c) The DNA testing uses a scientifically valid technique.
d) The DNA testing has the scientific potential to
produce new information that is relevant to the
proper resolution of the case.

e) The existence of other factors, if any, which the
court may consider as potentially affecting the
accuracy or integrity of the DNA testing. (S4 Rule
on DNA Evidence)
Q.

Is DNA testing conclusivo proof of non-paternity?

A.

Yes.

Q.

ls DNA testing proof of paternity?

A.

Yes. If the value_of_the Probability of Paternity is less
than 99.g%, the results of the DNA testing shall be
consicered as corroborative evidence; if 99.9% or
higher, there shall be a disputable presumption of
paternity. (Rule on DNA Evidence).

QUALIFICATION OF WITNESSES
Q.

Who is qualified to be a witness?

A.

Subject to specifically provided disqualification, any
person who can perceive and make known his
perception to others is qualified to be a witness. (S21
R130). A witness does not need to be qualified
beforehand as there is a presumption that the witness
is qualified to be such

718

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

ls religious or political belief or interest In the
outcome of a case a ground for disqualification of
a witness?

A.

No. (Id.) Interest in the outcome of a case may affect
the weight of the witness' testimony but is not a
ground for his disqualification.

Q.

ls conviction of a crime
disqualification of a witness?

A.

No. (Id.). It may however be used to impeach the
witness. (S12 R132)

Q.

Are persons convicted of falsification of a document,
perjury, or false testimony disqualified from being
witnesses in court?

A.

No. The disqualification under Article 821 refers to
disqualification merely as an attesting and subscribing
witness to the will under Article 805 of the Civil
Code and not to disqualification as a witness in court.
Hence such persons can still testify In the probate
of a will although obviously not as attesting and
subscribing witnesses.

0.

D, E, and F are solidarily indebted to P in the
amount of P900,000.P filed a complaint for collection

a

ground

for

of the P900,000 against D, E, and F before the
RTC. D filed an answer within the reglementary
period but E and F did not; hence E and F were
declared in default upon P's motion. May E and F
testify in behalf of D?
A

Yes. A defaulted party is not disqualified from
testifying in court in behalf of a non-defaulted party.
(Cavili • Florendo, 154 SCRA 610)

719

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

The AFP Retirement and Separation Benefits
System (AFP RSBS) filed with the RTC an
application for original registration of three parcels of
land in Bicutan, Tagulg. The AFP RSBS presented
as its witness Ms. Alma Aban, its Vice President.
After due proceedings, the RTC rendered judgment
dismissing AFP.RSBS' application for failure to
prosecute. The reason of the RTC in dismissing
AFP-RSBS's application for land registration on
the ground of fallure to prosecute was the lack of
authority on the part of Ms. Aban to testify on
behalf of AFP.RSBS. Was the RTC's dismissal of
the application for land registration correct?

A.

No. There is no substantive or procedural rule which
requires a witness for a party to present some form of
authorization to testify as a witness for the party
presenting him or her. No law or jurisprudence would
support the conclusion that such omission can be
considered as a failure to prosecute on the part of the
party presenting such witness. All that the Rules
require of a witness is that the witness possesses all
the qualifications and none of the disqualifications
provided therein. (AFP.RSBS • Republic, 20 March

2013, Villarama, J.).
Q.

Who are disqualified to be witnesses?

A.

Under the former Rules on Evidence, the following
persons cannot be witnesses: (MIM DIP)
1)

Those

who

are

mentally

incapacitated

and

immature children. (S21[a] R130)
2)

Spouses under the marital disqualification rule.

($22 R130)
3)

Claimants against the estate of a deceased person
or against an insane person. (S23 R130).

720

Parol Evidence Rule

4) Those who are disqualified by reason of privileged
communication. (S24 R130).
The 2020 Rules on Evidence have abolished the
disqualifications under Nos. 1 and 3.

O.

Is a child qualified to be a witness?

A.

As a rule yes. Every child is presumed qualified to be
a witness. The court may conduct a competency
examination, motu proprio or on motion, if it finds that
substantial doubt exists as to the child's competency
to testify. (S6, Rule on Examination of a Child Witness
[RECW]), The 2020 amendments abolished the
disqualification by reason of immaturity.

0.

Who is a child witness?

A

One who at the time of giving testimony is below 18.
In child abuse cases, a child includes one who is 18
and above but is unable to fully take care of himself or
protect himself from cruelty, abuse, neglect, exploitation
or discrimination (CANED) because of a physical or
mental disability or condition. (S4[a] RECW),

Q.

Are deaf-mutes qualified to be witnesses?

A.

Yes. Deaf-mutes are competent witnesses where they
(1) can understand and appreciate the sanctity of an
oath; (2) can understand facts they are going to testify
on; and (3) can communicate their ldeas through a
qualified interpreter. (People v. Aleman, 24 July 2013,
Leonardo-De Castro, J.).

721

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Marital Disqualification Rule
Q.

What is the marital disqualification rule?

A.

The rule which provides that during their marriage, a
spouse cannot testify against the other spouse without
the latter's consent. (S23 R130)."

Q.

What are the exceptions
disqualification rule?

A.

A spouse may testify against the other in;

to

the

marital

1) A civil case by one against the other, or

2)

Q.

A criminal case for a crime committed by one
spouse against the other or the latter's direct
descendants or ascendants.

Jose was charged with murder. The lone evidence
of the prosecution is the eyewitness testimony of
Clara. One day before Clara was scheduled to
testify for the prosecution, she and Jose got

married in a civil ceremony. May the defense
counsel object to the presentation of Clara as a
prosecution witness?

A.

Yes. It is enough that the marriage was already
existing at the time of the offer of the testimony, even
if the marriage occurred after the fact sought to be
testified to.

a.

Allan and Narita were married on 1 August 1989.
After 2 months, Narita told Allan in confidence
that the 10-year-old Liza whom she claimed to be
her niece was actually her daughter by a certain
Basilio, a married man.

ate hat ne 2020 amendments removed the word for after "testfy."
Hence if the wife is present in cot and the count calls upon her to testify
pursuant to s7 R21, the husbard cannot object f she will testiy tor him.

722

Paro. Evidence Rule

In 1992, Narita obtained a judicial decree of
nullity of her marriage with Allan on the latter's
psychological incapacity to fulfill his marital
obligations, When the decree became final, Liza,
assisted by Narita, filed 10 cases of rape against
Allan purportedly committed In 1991. During the
trial, Narita was called to the witness stand to
testify as a witness against Allan who objected
thereto on the ground of marital disqualification.
1)

As public prosecutor, how would you meet
the objection?

2)

Suppose Narita's testimony was offered while
the decision nullifying her marriage to Allan
was pending appeal, would your answer be
different? (1995 Bar Q)

A.
1) I would argue that the marital disqualification rule
is not applicable since the marriage between
Allan and Narita was declared null and void.
2) No, my answer would not be the different. I would
still argue that the marital disqualification rule is
not applicable since an exception to the rule is in
a criminal case for a crime committed by one
spouse against the latter's direct descendant.
Q.

Susan is the private complainant in a criminal
case for arson against accused Maximo, the husband
of Susan's sister, Esperanza. Prior to the filing of
the criminal case, Esperanza and Maximo were
separated de facto for six months. The prosecution
called as its first witness Esperanza for the
purpose of proving that Maximo had poured
gasoline on the house of Susan knowing fully well
that Susan and Esperanza were in the house and

723

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

that Maximo ignited the gasoline resulting in a fire
which destroyed parts of the house. The defense
counsel did not object to the offer of Esperanza's
testimony. In the course of her testimony Esperanza

testified that she saw Maximo pour gasoline on
the house and then ignite the gasoline. Her direct
examination was suspended after she broke down
and cried. Afterwards, the defense counsel filed a
motion to disqualify Esperanza trom testifying
against Maximo on the basis of the marital
disqualification rule. The trial court granted the
motion and expunged from records the direct
testimony of Esperanza.
Was the trial court's ruling proper? Explain,
A.

The trial court's ruling was not proper.
The purpose of the marital disqualification rule is
to preserve the harmony, peace, and tranquility of the
marital relation.
The act of Maximo in setting fire to the house of
Susan, knowing fully well that Susan and Esperanza
were there, had the effect of directly impairing the
conjugal relation. The records also show that Maximo
and Esperanza were separated de facto for six
months. Where there Is no more harmony to be
preserved nor peace and tranquility to be disturbed,
the reason for the marital disqualification rule ceases
and a spouse may testify against the other. (Alvarez
• Ramirez, G.R. NO. 143439, 14 October 2005.)
Note: It is submitted that the ruling in Alvarez is
an exceptional one and should not be extended
beyond the peculiar facts of the case, to wit: (1) the
defense counsel failed to timely raise the objection of
marital disqualification, in effect waiving such objection;
and (2) there was an allegation in the information that

724

Parol Evidence Rule

at the time Maximo set fire to Susan's house he knew
fully well that Esperanza was inside the house, which
in effect was an allegation that Maximo had committed
an offense against his wife. Alvarez should not be
taken as a carte blanche for holding that the marital
disqualification rule does not apply where there is no
harmony, peace, or tranquility in the marital relation
The lack or absence of marital harmony or peace is
not an exception provided for in S23 R130. In fact,
one of the reasons given by law writers and courts for
the rule is that where a want of domestic tranquility
exists, there is a danger of punishing one spouse
through the hostile testimony of the other. (People v.
Francisco, G.R. No. L-568, 16 July 1947)

0.

Leticia was estranged from her husband Paul for
more than a year due to his suspicion that she
was having an affair with Manuel, their neighbor. She
was temporarily living with her sister in Pasig City.
For unknown reasons, the house of Leticia's
sister was burned, killing the latter. Leticia survived.
She saw her husband in the vicinity during the
Incident. Later he was charged with arson in an
Information filed with the Regional Trial Court,
Pasig City.
During the trial, the prosecutor called Leticia
to the witness stand and offered her testimony to
prove that her husband committed the arson.
Can Leticia testify over the objection of
her husband on the ground of marital privilege?
(06 Bar Q15).

A.

Yes Leticia can testify over the objection of her
husband.

725

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
Under the Rules of Evidence, an exception to the

marital disqualification rule is in case of a criminal
offense committed by one spouse against the other.
Here Paul's act of burning the house of Leticia's

sister at a time when Leticia was there was for all
intents and purposes a criminal offense by Paul
against Leticia, Hence this case is excepted from the
marital disqualification rule. (See Alvarez v.Ramirez,
G.R. Na. 143439, 14 October 2005)
It should be noted that in Alvarez the defense
counsel failed to timely object to the presentation of
the accused's wife on the witness stand. Defense
counsel moved to disqualify the wife only after she
had testified.

Q.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged from
her husband Walter because of the latter's suspicion
that she was having an affair with Vladimir, a
barangay kagawad who lived in nearby Mandaluyong.
Nenita lived in the meantime with her sister in
Makati, One day, the house of Nenita's slster
inexplicably burned almost to the ground. Nenita
and her sister were caught inside the house but
Nenita survived as she fled in time, while her
sister tried to save belongings and was caught
inside when the house collapsed. As she was
running away from the burning house, Nenita was
surprised to see her husband also running away
from the scene. Dr. Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist
who lived near the burned house and whom
Walter medically consulted after the fire, also saw
Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the fire.
Coincidentally, Fr. Patino, the parish priest who
regularly hears Walter's confession and who heard it
after the fire, also encountered him not too far

726

Paro! Evidence Rule

away from the burned house. Walter was charged
with arson and at his trial, the prosecution moved
to introduce the testimonies of Nenita, the doctor
and the prlest-confessor, who all saw Walter at
the vicinity of the fire at about the time of the fire.
a)

May the testimony of Nenita be allowed over
the objection of Walter? (13 Bar Q9a).
XXX
XXX

A.

Yes the testimony of Nenita may be allowed over the

objection of Walter.
Under the Rules of Evidence an exception to the
marital disqualification rule is In a criminal case

committed by one spouse against the other.
Here, the criminal case was for arson committed
by Walter against Nenita and her sister. Hence,
Nenita's testimony is admissible over the objection
that the same is violative of the marital disqualification
rule. The fact that Nenita has been estranged from
her husband Walter for over a year is of no
consequence since Nenita and Walter are still married
to each other
0.

Vito was estranged and separated from his wife
Connie, because of the latter's affair with Bob, an
rishman. While Connie and Bob were having
dinner In a restaurant, Vito appeared and before
Connie's shocked eyes, shot and killed Bob. Vito
was prosecuted for murder, The prosecution calls
as its witness Connie. The defense counsel objected
on the ground of the marital disqualification rule.
If you were the judge, how would you rule on the
objection? Explain.

727

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
A.

IfI were the judge, I would sustain the objection.

Under the marital disqualification rule, a spouse
cannot testify against the other spouse, without the
latter's consent, The fact that Vito was estranged and
separated from his wife is not an exception under the

rule, the material fact being that they were still spouses
under the law.
Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the
qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11, 2009
a text message, which Mabini's estranged wife
Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of his
death, reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u ni Mabini. Mtgal
n nyang plano i2. Mg ingat u bka ma tsugi k."

a)

A subpoena ad testificandum was served on

Gregoria for her to be presented for the
purpose of identifying her cellphone and the
text message. Mabini objected to her presentation
on the ground of marital privilege. Resolve.

b) Suppose Mabini's objection in question A was
sustained. The prosecution thereupon announced
that it would be presenting Emilio's wife
Graciana to Identify Emilio's cellphone bearing
Gregoria's text message. Mabini objected
again. Rule on the objection.

A.

c)

xxx

d)

xxx (10 Bar Q1).

a) The objection should be sustained.
Under the marital disqualification rule, a spouse
may not testify for or against the other without the
latter's consent.

728

Parol Evidence Rule

Here although the ground invoked was "marital
privilege," it is evident that Mabini was referring to the
marital disqualification rule. The mere fact that Gregoria
was estranged from Mabini is not an exception to the

marital disqualification rule.
b) The objection should be overruled.
Under the Rules on Evidence, the marital
disqualification rule may be invoked by a spouse only
against his or her spouse. The marital disqualification
rule may not be invoked by Mabini against Graciana
since the latter is not his wife.
As to the text message, it would be premature to

object to the same since it is documentary evidence
and the same has not yet been offored in evidence.
Mere identification of a documentary evidence is not
an offer thereof.13
Q.

Susan filed a criminal action against Roberto for
bigamy, alleging that Roberto married her during
the existence of his prior marriage to Marilyn.
During the trial, Susan cited Marilyn to testify

against Roberto. Roberto objected and moved to
disqualify Marilyn on the ground that he was her
husband. Is the objection of Roberto tenable? Why?

(82 Bar 019)
A.

No. An exception to the marital disqualification rule is
in the case of a crime committed by one spouse against
the other. Here the clime of bigamy is an offense not
only against Susan but against Marilyn as wsit 3

a re question suffers from an imperfection in that it stated simply that
"Mabini objected again' without specifying the evidence he objected to and the
ground for the objection, The suggested answer presumes that Mabini objected
to both the testimony and to the text message and that the ground of objection to
the first is the marital disqualification rule
pa U.S • Orsa, 7 Phi 247, 251-252 (1906) it was held that bigamy is
a crime that is not committed against the lawful spouse, and hence the latter
could be barred from testifying against his or her errant spouse. This ruling is

729

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

Plaintiff filed a complaint against a husband and
wife who are co-defendants. The Plaintiff called
the wife as an adverse-party witness. May the
husband object to the presentation of his wife as
an adverse-party witness?

A.

Yes on the ground of the marital disqualification rule.
To allow the wife to testify would in effect mean that

she would be testifying for or against her husband.
(Lezama v. Rodriguez, 23 SCRA 1166)
Disqualification by reason of adverse party's death
or insanity

0.
A.

State the rule on disqualification by reason of the
insanity of the adverse party
Under the former Rules on Evidence, parties or
assignors of parties to a case, or persons in whose

behalf a case is prosecuted, against an insane
person, upon a claim against such Insane person,
cannot testify as to any matter of fact occurring before
such person became insane. ($23 R130). This
disqualification has been abolished by S39 R130 of
the 2020 Rules on Evidence which provides that such
partles, assignors, or persons can testify on a matter
of fact occurring before the person became of unsound
mind, subject to the hearsay exception under S39
R130 regarding the statement of the person of
unsound mind.

arguao'e. It cannot be gainsaid that bigamy is committed not only against the second
person married, but also against the lawful spouse. (People v. Concepcion, 41 0.G
2878, cted in ANTONIO L GREGORIO. FUNDAMENTALS OF CR MINAL LAW
REVIEW 544 [1985 7 +.)

730

Parol Evidence Rule

Dead Man's Rule
Q.

State the rule on disqualification by reason of the
death of the adverse party, also known as the
Dead Man's Rule.

A.

Under the former Rules on Evidence, parties or
assignors of parties to a case, or persons in whose
behalf a case is prosecuted, against an executor or
administrator or other representative of a deceased
person, upon a claim or demand against the estate of
such deceased person, cannot testify as to an_matter
of fact occurring before the death of such deceased
person. (S23 R130). This disqualification has been
abolished by S39 R130 of the 2020 Rules on
Evidence which provides that such parties, assignors,
or persons can testify on a matter of fact occurring
before the death of the deceased, subject to the
hearsay exception under S39 R130 regarding the
statement of the deceased.

PRIVILEGES (MAP PP)
•

What are the disqualifications by reason of privileged
communications under the Rules on Evidence?

A.

The following are the disqualifications by reason of
privileged communications under the Rules on
Evidence.
Marital Communication Privilege
Attorney-Client Privilege
Physician, Psychotherapist-Patient Privilege.
Priest's/Minister's Privilege
Public Interest Privilege.

731

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

May a police or law enforcement official undertake
surveillance, Interception, or recording of communications
by terrorists or suspected terrorists?

A.

Yes. under Section 7 of the Human Security Act, a
police or law enforcement official may apply for a
written order from the Court of Appeals authorizing
the surveillance or interception or recording of
communications by terrorists or suspected terrorists
Such surveillance etc. shall not be authorized over
communications between attorneys and clients,
physicians and patients, journalists and their sources,
and confidential business correspondence.

Q.

ls the confidential character of a privileged
communication lost If It ls In the form of an
electronic document?

A.

No.

The

confidential

character

of

a

privileged

communication is not lost solely on the ground that it is
in the form of an electronic document. (S3 R3, REE).

MARITAL COMMUNICATION PRIVILEGE
Q.

What is the marital communication privilege?

A.

It is the privilege which provides that the husband or
wife cannot be examined without the consent of the
other as to any confidential communication received
from the other during the marriage except in a civil
case by one against the other or in a criminal case for
a crime committed by one against the other or the
latter's direct ascendants or descendants. (S24[a]
R130)

732

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

Distinguish the marital disqualification rule from
the marital communication privilege. (74 Bar Q6)

A.

The marital disqualification rule is distinguished from
the marital communication privilege as follows:
AS TO PERIOD OF EFFECTIVITY. The marital
disqualification rule is effective only during the
existence of the marriage, while the marital communication
rule subsists even after the termination of the marriage.
AS TO SCOPE. The marital disqualification rule
is a total prohibition against any testimony by one spouse
against the other, while the marital communication
privilege applies only to confidential communications
between the spouses.
AS TO A SPOUSE BEING A PARTY TO THE
ACTION. The marital disqualification rule can be
invoked only if one of the spouses is a party to the
action, while the marital communication privilege may
be invoked whether or not a spouse is a party to the
action

MARITAL
DISQUALIFICATION
RULE

MARITAL COMMUNICATION
PRIVILEGE

A blanket disqualification
of a spouse from testifying
against the other

The privilege applies only to
confidential communications

Effective only during the
existence of the marriage

Effective during and
after the marriage

of

Can be invoked only if one
the spouses is a party to
the action
'-

----

-------<

May be invoked whether
or not a spouse is a
I
party to the actioo_'

�--733

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME

O.

Ody sued spouses Cesar and Baby for a sum of
money and damages. At the trial, Ody called Baby
as his first witness. Baby objected, joined by Cesar,
on the ground that she may not be compelled to
testify against her husband. Ody insisted and
contended that after all, she would just be
questioned about a conference they had with the

barangay captain, a matter which is not confidential
in nature, The trial court ruled in favor of of Ody.
Was the ruling proper? Will your answer be the
same if the matters to be testified on were known
to Baby or acquired by her prior to her marriage
to Cesar? Explain. (89 Bar Q11[2]).
A.

The trial court's ruling allowing Ody to call Baby as his

witness is not proper.
The Supreme Court has held that a wife, who is
a co-defendant of her husband in an action, may not
be examined as an adverse-party witness without
infringing on the marital disqualification rule. (Lezama
v. Rodriuez,
g 23 SCRA 1166 [1968])

My answer would be the same even if the matters
to be testified on were known to Baby or acquired by
her prior to her marriage to Cesar.
The marital disqualification rule is a blanket
disqualification of a spouse from testifying against or
for the other spouse on any matter of fact. whether
confidential or acquired prior to the marriage.
Q.

Allan and Narita were married on 1 August 1989,
After 2 months, Narita told Allan in confidence
that the 10-year-old Liza whom she claimed to be
her niece was actually her daughter by a certain
Basilio, a married man.

734

Parol Evidence Rule

In 1992, Narita obtained a judicial decree of
nullity of her marriage with Allan on the latter's
psychological incapacity to fulfill his marital
obligations. When the decree became final, Liza,
assisted by Narita, filed 10 cases of rape against
Allan purportedly committed In 1991. During the
trial, Narita was called to the witness stand to
testify as a witness against Allan who objected
thereto on the ground of marital disqualification.

A.

1)

xxx

2)

xx

3)

Suppose the decision nulllfylng the marriage
was appealed and Narita died during the
pendency of the appeal, and soon after, the
legal wife of Basilio sued for legal separation
on sexual infidelity in view of Basilio's love
affair with Narita. At the trial Allan was called
by Basilio's wife to testify that Narita confided
to him (Allan) during their marriage that Liza
was her love child by Baslllo. As counsel for
Basilio, can you validly object to the presentation
of Allan as witness for the plaintiff? Explain,
(1995 Bar Q ed)

1)00¥

2) xx
3)

No, as counsel for Basilio I cannot validly object
on the ground of the marital disqualification rule
since the marriage had already been terminated
by Narita's death. Nor may I object on the ground
that Narita's statement is covered by the marital
communication privilege, The one who may
invoke the privilege is Allan, the party to the

735

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
marriage, and not Basilio. Finally, I cannot validly
object on the ground of hearsay since Narti a's

statement is a declaration against interest and
hence excepted from the hearsay rule.

0.

Prosecution of H for the murder of P, the
paramour of H's wife W. The prosecution calls W
to the witness stand and offers her testimony in
order to prove the circumstances surrounding P's
killing. After preliminary questions, the Prosecution
asks W if he saw H leave the crime scene minutes
after the killing of P, The defense objects on the
ground of the marital disqualification rule,
a) If you were the judge, how would you rule on
the objection? Explain.

Subsequently the prosecution asks W whether,
days before the killing while resting in their
bedroom, H had told her that he hates P because
of W's feelings for P. The defense objects on the
ground of the marital communication privilege.
b)
A.

If you were the judge, how would you rule on
the objection? Explain.

a) IfI were the judge, I would overrule the objection.
Under the Rules of Evidence, objection to offer of
evidence must be made orally immediately after the
offer is made. (S36 R132).

Here the defense did not immediately object at
the time W's testimony was offered in evidence
although the ground for the objection (that W was H's
wife) was already apparent at that point. Hence the
defense waived the ground for the objection.
b)

If!were the judge, I would sustain the objection

736

Parol Evidence Rule

Under the Rules of Evidence, objection to a
question propounded in the course of the witness's
oral examination must be made as soon as the
grounds therefor shall become reasonably apparent.
($36 R132)

Here the ground for the objection, that the
communication was made in confidence during the
marriage, became reasonably apparent only at the
time the question was propounded. Hence the objection
was timely made.
Q.

At A's trial for B's murder, the defense attempts to
present as its witness B's widow, X. She is to
testify that just before B died, she approached his
sprawled and bloodied husband and asked who
stabbed him. B, conscious of his impending
death, named Y as his assailant, The prosecution
moves to stop X from testifying because her
testimony (1) is hearsay, and (2) will be violative
of the rule on privileged marital communication.
Rule on the prosecution's motion. Explain, (96 Bar
015-1).

A.

Prosecution's motion to stop X from testifying is
denied.

While X's testimony on what B said is indeed
hearsay, it is however a dying declaration which is an
exception to the hearsay rule, B's declaration related
to the circumstances of his death and he was conscious
of his impending death, Being excepted from the
hearsay rule, B's dying declaration is admissible in
evidence. (S38 R130).

X's testimony on what B had told her is not
covered by the rule on privileged marital communication.
Such rule cannot bo invoked if the communication

was not intended to be kept in confidence as in the
737

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

case of a dying declaration wherein the declarant's
purpose is to identify his assailant. (U.S. , Antipolo,

37 Phil. 726)
Q.

Suit by Plaintiff wife against her husband, The
husband did not object to the wife taking the
witness stand against him. The wife was asked
regarding the contents of a letter written by her
husband to him. The husband objected to the question

on the ground of the marital communication
privilege. The Plaintiff argued that the husband
had waived the privilege when he did not object to

his wife taking the witness stand. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

Yes. While the husband waived the marital
disqualification rule by not raising the objection when
the wife's testimony was offered in evidence at the
time she took the witness stand, he did not thereby
waive the objection based on the marital communication
privilege. The ground for the objection based on
marital communication privilege became apparent
only at the time the objectionable question was asked
of the wife.

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE
Q.

What is the attorney-client privilege?

A.

The privilege which provides that an attorney or
person reasonably believed by the client to be
licensed to engage in tho practice of law cannot,
without the client's consent, be examired as to any
communication made by the client to him or his
advice given thereon in the course of, or with a view
to, professional employment. Nor can an attorney's
secretary stenographer, or clerk, or other persons
assisting the attorney be examined without the

738

Parol Evidence Rule

consent of the client and his employer concerning any
fact the knowledge of which has been acquired in
such capacity. ($24[] R130 as amended by the

amended rules).
The rules safeguarding privileged communication
between attorney and client shall apply to similar
communications made to or received by the law
student, acting for a legal clinic. (S3 R138-A [Law
Student Practice Rule]).
Q.

What is the purpose of the attorney-client privilege?

A.

The purpose of the privilege is to encourage fill and
frank communication between attorneys and their
clients and thereby promote broader public interests
in the observance of law and administration of justice.
The privilege recognizes that sound legal advice or
advocacy serves public ends and that such advice or
advocacy depends upon the lawyer's being fully
informed by the client. The purpose of the privilege is
to encourage clients to make full disclosure to their
attorneys. (Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383
(1981))

Q.

Does the privilege survive the client's death?

A.

Yes. Knowing that communications will remain
confidential even after death encourages the client to
communicate fully and frankly with counsel. Clients
may be concerned about reputation, civil liability, or
possible harm to other persons, especially friends or
family. Posthumous disclosure of such communications
may be as feared as disclosure during the client's
lifetime. (Swidler & Berlin v. United States, 524 U.S.
399 [1998])

739

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

X was driving the dump truck of Y along Cattleya
Street in Sta. Maria, Bulacan. Due to his negligence,

X hit and injured V who was crossing the street.
Lawyer L, who witnessed the incident, offered his

legal services to V. V, who suffered physical
Injuries Including a fractured wrist bone, underwent
surgery to screw a metal plate to his wrist bone.

On complaint of V, a criminal case for Reckless
Imprudence Resulting in Serious Physical Injuries
was filed against X before the Munlcipal Trlal
Court (MTC) of Sta. Maria. Atty. L, the private
prosecutor, did not reserve the filing of a separate
civil action. V subsequently filed a complaint for

Damages against X and Y before the Regional
Trial Court of Pangasinan in Urdaneta whore he
resides. In his "Certification Against Forum Shopping,"
y made no mention of the pendency of the
criminal case in Sta. Maria.
XXX

e) Atty. L offered in the criminal case his affidavit
respecting what he witnessed during the
incident. X's lawyer wanted to cross-examine
Atty. L who, however, objected on the ground
of lawyer-client privilege. Rule on the objection.
(10 Bar Q4e).
A.

The objection should be overruled. The attorney-client
privilege applies only to the communications between
the attorney and client and the lawyer's advice given
in the course of or with a view to professional
employment. The contents of the affidavit do not
involve any communication between Atty. L and his
client but relate only to what Atty. L witnessed at the
time of the accident. Hence Atty. L may be crossexamined as to the contents thereof

740

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

Pedro went to the office of Attorney Juan. Pedro
told the latter that he had committed murder and
wanted to engage Attorney Juan as defense counsel.
However the two could not reach agreement as to
the amount of the retainer so Pedro walked away
without hiring Attorney Juan, ls the communication
by Pedro to Attorney Juan that he had committed
murder privileged?

A.

Yes,

The attorney-client privilege extends to
communications made by a person to a lawyer "with a
view to professional employment." Hence even if the
professional employment of the lawyer did not push
through, any communication made to the lawyer with
a view to engaging the lawyer is privileged. Also PRule
15.02 of the Code of Professioral Responsibility
provides that [a] lawyer shall be bound by the rule on
privilege communication in respect of matters disclosed
to him by a prospective client."

Q.

May the attorney himself be the one to invoke the
privilege?

A.

Yes, either the client or his lawyer may raise the
privilege. (Republic Gear Co. v. Borg-Wamer Corp.,

381 F.2d 551 [CA2 1967]
Q.

When a client charges his lawyer of violating the
attorney-client privilege, must he aver specifically
the confidential communication or advice breached
by the lawyer?

A.

Yes. A mere general accusation will not suffice.
(Adelta Properties v. Mendoza, 16 Oct 2019)

741

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What are the exceptions to the attorney-client
privilege?

A,

The following are excepted from the attorney-client
privilege
Furtherance of crime or fraud. If the services or
advice of the lawyer were sought or obtained to
enable or aid anyone to commit or plan to commit
what the client knew or reasonably should have
known to be a crime or frau.

i.

li, Claimants through same deceased client. As to a
communication relevant to an issue between
parties who claim through the same deceased
client, regardless of whether the claims are by
testate or intestate or by inter vvos transaction.
iii. Breach of duty by lawyer or client. As to a
communication relevant to an issue of breach of
duty by the lawyer to his client or by the client to
his lawyer.
iv.

Document attested by the lawyer. As to a
communication relevant to an issue concerning
an attested document to which the lawyer is an
attesting witness.

v. Joint clients. As to a communication relevant to a
matter of common interest between two or more
clients if the communication was made by any of
them to a lawyer retained or consulted in common,
when offered in an action between any of the
clients, unless they have expressly agreed otherwise.
(S24[p1 [ to v] R130, 2020 Rules on Evidence]"

rpt is a codification of the well-known tule that the privilege applies
only to past not future cnmes

These exceptions were added in the 202 Rules on Eviderce. The prior
rule did not specify expressly any exception.

742

Parol Evidence Rule

A lawyer may reveal secrets when necessary to
collect fees or to defend himself, his associates, or
employees. (Rule 21.01[c], Code of Professional
Responsibility)

0.

Illustrate the exception regarding claimants through
same deceased client.

A

A and B are brothers. Their father hired Atty L to draft
the will, Father died. B wants to show that their father
intended Lot B to belong to B. Atty. L can testify that
the Father intended to devise Lot B to B as shown by
the will,

O.

Illustrate the exception regarding breach of duty
by lawyor or client.

A.

Where the client alleges that the lawyer's fees were
excessive, the lawyer can disclose relevant
communication to show that the case was complex
and difficult thus justifying higher fees.

Q.

Illustrate the exception regarding document attested
by the lawyer.

A.

A lawyer was the attesting witness to a will. In a
probate case, the lawyer may testify regarding the
attendant circumstances to the execution of the will in
order to show that the testator was of sound and
disposing mind

Q.

Illustrate the exception regarding joint clients.

A.

The lawyer was hired by lender and borrower to draft
their loan and mortgage agreement. A dispute arose
between lender and borrower on whether applying for
government financial aid is an event of default
Lender can present lawyer to testify that the parties'
intention was that such application is an event of
default thus justifying the lender into calling in the loan

743

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

ls the client's identity covered by the attorneyclient privilege?

A.

No. The genera! rule is that the client's identity is not
privileged because without a client, there can be no
attorney-client privilege; hence it is but proper that the

client be identified before the privilege may be invoked.
The general rule is however subject to the following
exceptions:
1) Where a strong probability exists that revealing the

client's name would implicate him in the very
activity for which he sought the lawyer's advice.
2)

Where disclosure would expose the client to civil

liability.
3)

Where the government's lawyers have no case
against an attorney's client unless, by revealing
the client's name, the said name would furnish
the only link that would form the chain of testimony
necessary to convict an individual of a crime.

4)

Where the client's identity is relevant to the subject
matter of the legal problem on which the client
sought legal assistance.

5) Where the nature of the attorney-client relationship
has been previously disclosed and it is the
identity which is Intended to be confidential, the
client's identity is confidential since revelation would
result in disclosure of the entire transaction. (Regala

v. Sandiganbayan, 262 SCRA 124 [1996])
Q.

The Republic, through the PCGG, brought a suit
against principal defendant Eduardo Cojuangco
Jr. for recovery of ill-gotten wealth, Included as
defendants were ACCRA lawyers Teodoro Regala,
Edgardo Angara, and others. The ACCRA lawyers
admitted that they had assisted in the organization
744

Parol Evidence Rule

and formation of the corporations involved in the
sequestration proceedings and that in keeping
with office practice, they had acted as nomineestockholders in these corporations. Dropped by
the PCGG as defendant was Raul Roco upon his
promise that he would disclose his client. PCGG
told the ACCRA lawyers that they would be
dropped from the complaint if they disclosed their
clients, but the lawyers refused to do so. The
ACCRA lawyers moved before the Sandiganbayan
that they be excluded from the complaint but the
SB denied their motion on the ground that the
attorney-client privilege does not apply to the
client's identity. Was the identity of the ACCRA
lawyer's clients privileged?
A.

Yes. The general rule is that the client's identity is not
privileged because without a client, there can be no
attorney-client privilege; hence it is but proper that the
client be identified before the privilege may be
invoked. The general rule is however subject to
exceptions, such as (1) where a strong probability
exists that revelation of the client's identity would
implicate him in the very activity for which he sought
the lawyer's advice, and (2) where the government's
lawyers have no case against an attorney's client
unless, by revealing the client's name, the said name
would furnish the only link that would form the chain
of testimony necessary to convict an individual of a
crime. Here for the ACCRA lawyers to identify their
clients would implicate them in the very activity for
which legal advice had been sought, i.e., the alleged
accumulation of ill-gotten wealth in the sequestered
corporations. Moreover disclosure of the client's
identity would provide the necessary link for the
prosecution to build its case where none had existed

745

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

before. The ACCRA lawyers should be excluded from
the complaint for it is clear that the only purpose for

their inclusion was to compel them to disclose their
clients. (Regala v. Sandiganbayan, supra).
Q.

John Doe walks into a lawyer's office with a view
to engaging the lawyer as his defense counsel. He
confesses that he is a serial killer and has killed
32 people. ls John Doe's communication to his
lawyer about his crimes privileged?

A.

Yes. The attorney-client privilege is all-encompassing
and covers communication regarding past crimes.

Q.

In the previous problem, what if John Doe tells the
lawyer that he intends to kill 32 more people as he
has a goal of one murder victim for each square
on the chessboard. Is this information privileged?

A.

No. The attorney-client privilege covers only communications
or information regarding past crimes. Information
regarding crimes intended to be committed or future
crimes is not privileged. The reason is obvious. The
lawyer and any law-abiding citizen for that matter has
a duty to prevent crimes when he is in a position to do
so, Moreover the privilege cannot be used as a shield
to protect and abet wrong-doing.
The exception regarding communication or
information regarding future crimes has been codified
in S24(b)(1) R130 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

Q.

a) Pedro Tigas, a known toughie, asked Atty.
Chloe to meet with him in the Jollibee Restaurant
In Harrison Plaza because he wanted to seek hor
legal advice on an important matter. Atty. Chloe
had once before been consulted by Pedro Tigas,
who had then paid her well. When they met in
Jollibee Restaurant, he confided his planned
assassination of Pepeng Taga, his rival for control

746

Parol Evidence Rule

of the neighborhood in San Andres Bukid, Manila.
He wanted her to represent him should he be
apprehended for the assassination. Atty. Chloe
did not agree, and left the restaurant in a hurry
before Pedro Tigas could utter anything more.
A few days afterwards, Pepeng Taga was
kllled near his house in San Andres Bukid, Manila.
The police follow-up team arrested Pedro Tigas
on the basis of testimony by at least two residents
that they had heard him saying two days before
the killing that Pepeng Taga would not live
beyond 48 hours. Should Atty. Chloe reveal to the
police investigator what Pedro Tigas had stated to
her at the Jollibee Restaurant without violating
the confidence of the latter as a client? Explain
your answer.
b)

A.

Assuming that the meeting between Pedro
Tigas and Atty. Chloe In Jolllbee Restaurant
occurred after the killing of Pepeng Taga, and
in that meeting Pedro Tigas expressly admitted
to Atty. Chloe in strict confidence as his
lawyer that he had shot Pepeng Taga. Is Atty.
Chloe ethically bound to reveal the admission
of Pedro Tigas to the police investigator what
Pedro Tigas had stated to her at the Jollibee
Restaurant? Explain your answer. (17 Bar
[Legal Ethics] Q2).

a) Yes, Atty Chloe may reveal to the police
investigator what Pedro Tigas had stated to her at the
Jollibee Restaurant without violating the confidence of
the latter as a client.
The Supreme Court has held that the attorneyclient privilege does not apply to communication from
the client regarding a future crime

747

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here at the time Pedro Tigas confided the
assassination to Atty, Chloe, the crime had not yet
been committed. Hence the same is a future crime
not covered by the attorney-client privilege.
b)

No, Atty. Chloe is not ethically bound to reveal the

admission of Pedro Tigas to the police investigator.
Here at the time Pedro Tigas made the
communication, the assassination had already been
committed. Hence the killing is a past crime covered
by the privilege.
Q.

Paredes was haled before the Tanodbayan for
preliminary investigation of a graft charge under
Section 3(a) of R.A. No. 3019. The Tanodbayan
issued a resolution recommending the criminal
prosecution of Paredes. Atty. Sansaet, as counsel
of Paredes, filed a motion for reconsideration of
the Tanodbayan resolution attaching thereto a
certificate of arraignment and dismissal order by
the MCT of a case involving the same facts as
those in the preliminary investigation. Atty. Sansaet
argued that the filing of the anti-graft case would
amount to double Jeopardy. Subsequently, a
criminal case for falsificatlon of public documents
was filed in the Sandiganbayan against Honrada
(the clerk of court of the MCTC), Paredes, and
Sansaet on the ground that they conspired in
submitting falsified certificate of arraignment and
dismissal order as attachments to the motion for
reconsideration of the Tanodbayan resolution.
Sansaet executed an affidavit in which he stated
that Paredes contrived to make it appear that the
MCTC had dismissed the case against him after
arraignment. The prosecution moved to discharge
Sansaet as a state witness but this was denied by

748

Paro! Evidence Rule

the SB on the ground that Sansaet's testimony
would be blocked by an invocation of the attorneyclient privilege. The SB stated that Sansaet's
testimony would relate to a past crime and hence
barred by the privilege. Was the reasoning of the
Sandiganbayan correct?
A.

No. In order to determine whether a communication
by a client to an attorney relates to a past or future
crime, the determinative point of time is when the
communication was made, not when the witness will

testify, Although at the time Sansaet would testify, the
falsification of public documents had already been
done, at the time his services were engaged and the
communication made to him, the falsification was still
to be committed. Hence the communication made to
Sansaet of the plan to submit falsified documents was
in relation to a future crime and outside the pale of the
attorney-client privilege. (People v. Sandiganbayan,

275 SCRA 505 (19971),

a.

On August 15, 2008, Edgardo committed estafa
against Petronilo in the amount of P3 Million.
Petronilo brought his complaint to the National
Bureau of Investigation, which found that Edgardo
had visited his lawyer twice, the first time on
August 14, 2008 and the second on August 16,
2008; and that both visits concerned the swindling
of Petronilo. During the trial of Edgardo, the RTC
issued a subpoena ad testificandum to Edgardo's
lawyer for him to testify on the conversations
during their first and second meetings. May the
subpoena be quashed on the ground of privileged
communication? Explain fully. (08 Bar 14)

749

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

The subpoena may be quashed as to the 16 August
2008 meeting but not as to the 14 August 2008
meeting. The Supreme Court has held that the attorneyclient privilege applies only to communications regarding
past crimes not to those concerning future crimes.
Here the 16 August 2008 meeting between
Edgardo and his lawyer concerned the swindling
which had already been committed a day earlier in 15
August 2008. Hence the same concerns a past crime
and is privileged. Oi course if the 16 August 2008
meeting between Edgardo and his lawyer was about
advice on how to destroy or conceal evidence of the
swindling, such communication and advice would be
unlawful and not covered by the privilege.
On the other hand, the 14 August 2008 meeting
between Edgardo and his lawyer was about the crime
of swindling that would be committed the next day
and hence a future crime not covered by the attorneyclient privilege. Hence the subpoena may not be
auashed insofar as the 14 August 2008 meeting was
concerned.

Q.

Sancho Mahilig went to the office of Atty. Charm
to engage her legal representation in the criminal
case for adultery that the husband of his socialite
friend had brought against him in the City
Prosecutor's Office in Manila. Atty. Charm thoroughly
interviewed Sancho in her office with only Linda,
the secretary/stenographer of Atty. Charm, the
only other person present. On that occasion,
Sancho candidly informed Atty. Charm about his
illicit affair with the socialite wife, and gave many
details. Linda faithfully recorded the interview.

750

Parol Evidence Rule

During the trial of the criminal case for
adultery, the trial prosecutor requested the court
to issue a subpoena duces tecum to compel the
production of the record of the interview and a
subpoena ad testificandum to compel Linda to
testify on the admission of the affair by Sancho.
Atty. Charm objected to the request on the basis
of lawyer-client confidentiality.

If you were the trial Judge, how will you
resolve the objection of Atty. Charm? Justify your
answer. (17 Bar [Legal Ethics] QBA).
A.

It were the trial judge, I would sustain the objection
of Atty. Charm.
The attorney-client privilege extends to the
attorney's secretary, stenographer, or clerk, who cannot
be examined without the consent of the client and
their employer, (S24[b] R130). Such privilege covers
not only the testimony of the secretary but also her
record of the client interview. (See Upjohn Co, v.
United States, 449 0.S. 383 [1981])

Q.

Does the attornoy-client privilege apply if the
cllent is a corporation?

A.

Yes. (United States v. Louisville & Nashville R. Co.,

236 0.S. 318 [1915). The problem is in determining
who the client exactly is since a corporation is an
artificial creature and an inanimate entity. Under the
"control group test," if the employee making the
communication, of whatever rank he may be, is in a
position to control or even to take a substantial part in
a decision about any action which the corporation
may take upon the advice of the attorney, then, in
effect, he is (or personifies) the corporation when he
makes his disclosure to the attorney and the privilege
would apply. (General Electric Co. v. Kirkpatrick, 312
F.2d 742 [CA])
751

PRIMER.-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Upjohn Company, an American multinational
pharmaceutical corporation, learned that payments
were made by a foreign subsidiary to foreign
government officials in order to secure business.
Upjohn's general counsel undertook an internal
investigation of the questionable payments and
sent questionnaires to the foreign managers
Involved. The responses were sent directly to the
general counsel, The general counsel also made
notes and memorandums regarding the responses
to the interview questions. Upjohn voluntarily
submitted a report to the SEC disclosing the
payments. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
began an investigation to determine the tax
consequences of the payments. The IRS issued a
summons to Upjohn demanding production of the
files relative to its investigation, the questionnaires,
the responses thereto, and the general counsel's
notes and memorandums of the interviews.
Upjohn declined to produce the questionnaires
and the responses thereto on the ground that they
were protected from disclosure by the attorneyclient privilege. The Court of Appeals held that
under the "control group test" the privilege did
not apply to the extent that the communications
were made by officers and agents not responsible
for directing Upjohn's actions in response to legal
advice for the reason that they do not personify
the corporation-client. In the case where the client
is a corporation, should the privilege be held to
apply only to the control group, that is, the officers
or agents of the corporation responsible for
directing the corporation's actions in response to
the legal advice?

752

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

No. The control group test overlooks the fact that the
attorney-client privilege exists to protect not only the
giving of professional advice to those who can act on
it but also the giving of information to the lawyer to
enable him to give sound and informed advice. While in
the case of the individual client the provider of
information and the person who acts on the lawyer's
advice are one and the same, in the corporate context
it will frequently be employees beyond the control
group who will possess the information needed by the
corporation's lawyers. Middle-lovel and indeed lowerlevel employees can by actions within the scope of
their employment embroil the corporation in serious
legal difficulties, and it is only natural that these
employees would have the relevant information needed
by corporate counsel if he is adequately to advise the
client With respect to such actual or potential difficulties.
(Up/john Co. v. United Statos, 449 U.S. 383). In this
case the U.S. Supreme Court rejected the control test

applied by the Court of Appeals
Q.

A client furnished his lawyer with documents
regarding a case for the purpose of obtaining
legal advice. The adverse party moved for the
issuance of a subpoena duces tecum to the
lawyer to produce the documents. May the lawyer
invoke the attorney-client privilege to quash the

subpoena?
A.

It depends if the documents while In the hands of the
client were privileged. If they were, the documents
when turned over to the lawyer would be protected by
the attorney-client privilege. Where the transfer is
made for the purpose of obtaining legal advice, the
purposes of the attorney-client privilege would be
defeated unless the privilege is applicable. Otherwise

753

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

clients would be discouraged from turning over relevant
documents to lawyers for fear of losing the privilege
with the result that the lawyer is unable to render

effective legal service,
If on the other hand, there is no pre-existing
privilege in the documents, there is no disincentive for
the clients to hand over the documents to the attorney
and the latter's ability to obtain informed legal advice
will remain unfettered. Hence the attorney-client privilege
would not apply. (Fisher v, United States, 425 US 391
[1976])
Q.

A taxpayer, who was under investigation for
possible civil or criminal liability under the federal
income tax laws, after having obtained from his

accountant certain documents relating to the
accountant's preparation of his tax roturns,
transferred the documents to his attorney to assist
the taxpayer in connection with the investigation.
Subsequently, the Internal Revenue Service served
summonses on the attorney directing him to
produce the documents, but the attorney refused
to comply. The Government then brought enforcement
actions, and, in each case, the District Court
ordered the summons enforced. The lawyer invoked
the attorney-client privilege and the Fifth Amendment
(privilege against self-incrimination) in resisting
compliance. May the summons be enforced?
A,

Yes. The test is that if the documents were privileged
in the hands of the client, then they would be
privileged if turned over to the lawyer for purposes of
obtaining legal advice,
Here the taxpayer cannot invoke the Fifth
Amendment since the workpaper's were not private
having been prepared not by the taxpayer but by mis

754

Parol Evidence Rule

accountant. Hence compelling their production would
not implicate the taxpayer's right against self-incrimination.
(Fisher v. United States, 425 US 391 (1976]).

0.

A lawyer was retained by the executor of an estate
to prepare the estate tax return. The Internal
Revenue Service sought by summons to obtain
from the lawyer all documents relating to or used
in the preparation of the return, The lawyer
invoked the attorney-client privilege in resisting
the summons. May the lawyer be compelled to
produce the documents?

A,

Yes. When information is transmitted to an attorney
with the intent that the information will be transmitted
to a third party (in this case on a tax return), such
information is not confidential. Such a transmission
destroys any expectation of confidentiality which
might have otherwise existed, whether or not the
information transmitted was disclosed on the return
In fine, information transmitted for the purpose of
preparation of a tax return, though transmitted.to an
attorney, is not privileged information. (United States
v.Lawless, 709 F.2d 485 [7" Cir, 1989])

Work-product doctrine
Q.

What is the work-product doctrine?

A.

The doctrine that the trial preparation materials of a
lawyer or his representative (e.g., paralegal, investigator,
etc.) are protected from discovery unless the other
party shows that it has a substantial need for the
materials to prepare its case, and cannot, without
undue hardship, obtain their substantial equivalent by
other means. Trial preparation materials include written
documents, such as records, notes, memorandums,
and tangible things. If discovery will be allowed, the
court must protect against disclosure of the mental
755

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
impressions, conclusions, opinions, and legal theories
of the lawyer or his representative, (See Rule
26(0)(3), Federal Rules of Civil Procedure). The workproduct doctrine is also known as the work-product
rule. It is not a privilege but a special protective rule
which limits discovery of an attorney's work product.
Q.

What is the reason for the work-product doctrine?

A.

The doctrine protects the attorney's right to work with
a certain degree of privacy in giving legal advice and

in preparing for trial. If the lawyer's tnal preparation
materials could be obtained by discovery, much of
what is now put down in writing would rerain unwritten
An attorney's thoughts, heretofore inviolate, would not
be his own. Inefficiency, unfaimess and sharp practices

would inevitably develop in the giving of legal advice
and in the preparation of cases for trial. The effect on
the legal profession would be demoralizing. And the
interests of the clients and the cause of justice would
be poorly served.(Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495
[1942]). The doctrine protects lawyers' effective trial

preparation by immunizing certain information and
materials from discovery.
Q.

Upjohn Company, an American multinational
pharmaceutical corporation, learned that payments
were made by a foreign subsidiary to foreign
government officials in order to secure business.
Upjohn's general counsel undertook an internal
investigation of the questionable payments and
sent questionnaires to the foreign managers
involved. The responses were sent directly to the
general counsel. The general counsol also made
notes and memorandums regarding the responses
to the interview questions. Upjohn voluntarily
submitted a report to the SEC disclosing the
payments. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) began
756

Parol Evidence Rule

an investigation to determine the tax consequences
of the payments, The IRS issued a summons to
Upjohn demanding production of the files relative
to its Investigation, the questionnaires, the responses
thereto, and the general counsel's notes and
memorandums of the interviews. Upjohn declined
to produce the notes and memorandums of the
interviews on the ground that these were protected
by the attorney-client privilege and these were
attorney work-product prepared in anticipation of
litigation. The Court of Appeals held that the notes
and memorandums constituted attorney workproduct but these may be obtained by discovery
since the government showed that it had a
substantial need for the materials and It could not
otherwise obtain the same without undue hardship.
Are the notes and memorandums protected by the
attorney-client privilege and the attorney workproduct doctrine?
A.

Insofar as the notes and memorandums of the
interviews record responses to the questionnaires, the
same are protected under the attorney-client privilege.
Where they go beyond the mere recordation of the
responses, the same would be covered by the workproduct doctrine.
It should be noted that the work-product doctrine
has two tiers. The first tier consists of trial preparation
materials which do not constitute the mental impressions,
conclusions, opinions, and legal theories of the
lawyer. The second consists of those which do, While
a showing of substantial need" and undue hardship"
would override the protection accorded under the first
tier, that would not hold true in respect of the second
tier which are absolutely protected from disclosure
Here the notes and memorandums reveal the general
counsel's mental processes in evaluating the interview

757

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
responses and as such tend to fall in the second tier.
The U.S. Supreme Court remanded the case to the
Court of Appeals to determine in what tier the
communications fall within. (Upjohn Co. v. United

States, 449 U.$. 383 [1981])
0.

A tugboat owned by Speedy Port Service, Inc.
(SPS) sank in Manila Bay while helping tow another
vessel, drowning five (5) of the crew in the resulting
shipwreck. At the maritime board inquiry, the four
(4) survivors testified. SPS engaged Atty. Ely to
defend it against potential claims and to sue the
company owning the other vessel for damages to
the tug. Ely obtained signed statements from the
survivors. He also interviewed other persons, in
some Instances making memoranda. The heirs of
the five (5) victims filed an action for damages
against SPS.

Plaintiffs' counsel sent written Interrogatories
to Ely, asking whether statements of witnesses
were obtained; if written, copies were to be
furnished; if oral, the exact provisions were to be
set forth in detail. Ely refused to comply, arguing
that the documents and information asked are
privileged communication. Is the contention
tenable? Explain, (08 Bar 020)
A.

Atty. Ely's contention is tenable in part His argument
that the documents and information are privileged
communication is correct insofar as those coming
from the crew members are concerned but not correct
with respect to those coming from witnesses who are
not crew members, Nonetheless the documents and
information coming from the latter are still protected
from disclosure pursuant to the work-product doctrine.

4? re 'acts of the ber question ate based on the U.S. case of Hickman v
Taylor, 329 LS.495 (1947) the case which originated the work-product doctrine

758

Paro! Evidence Rule

The written and oral statements he obtained from
the surviving crew members are protected under the
attorney-client privilege.
Where the client is a corporation, the attomeyclient privilege extends to the employees of the company
and thus their communications to the attorney for the
purpose of enabling him to give sound and informed
advice are considered privileged. (Upjohn Co. v
United States, 449 U.$. 383 (1981]))
Hence the written and oral statements of the
survivors, who are crewmembers and thus employees
of SPS, are privileged from discovery.

Atty. Ely's memoranda of his interview of other
witnesses who are not crewmembers, their written
statements obtained by him, and his recollection of
what they said to him are not protected by the
attorney-client privilege since the witnesses are not
employees of Atty. Ely's clients. Nonetheless such
memoranda, written statements and his recollections
of their oral statements are not discoverable pursuant
to the work-product doctrine which protects from discovery
a lawyer's trial preparation materials. (Hickman v
Taylor, 329 U.S. 495 [1947]) .
Hence while Atty. Ely's argument that the
documents and information are not privileged is not
entirely correct, his refusal to comply with the written
interrogatories is justified.

759

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Distinguish the attorney-client privilege from the
work-product doctrine.

A.

ATTORNEY-CLIENT
PRIVILEGE

WORK-PRODUCT
DOCTRINE

A privilege.

Not a privilege but a
special protective rule

against discovery.
Based on confidential
communication between

Extends to all trial
preparation material of the

client and attorney.

lawyer even if not based on
attorney-client
communication.

May not be overcome by a
May be overcome by a
showing of "substantial
showing of "substantial
need" and "undue hardship.'' f need" and "undue hardship.�
Applies broadly at all stages
of legal proceedings.

Operates primarily as a
limitation on pre-trial
discovery

I

I

(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 71 [2004 ed.]).
Q.

May the work-product doctrine be invoked in the
Philippines?

A.

While the work-product doctrine is not expressly
recognized in Philippine law and jurisprudence, it is
submitted that it may be invoked in the Philippines
pursuant to S16 R23 on motion for protective orders
or to S18 R23 on motion to terminate or l!mit
examination. Similar provisions in the Federal Rules

760

Parol Evidence Rule

of Civil Procedure were cited by the U.S. Supreme
Court in Hickman v. Taylor, 329 U.S. 495 (1947), in
laying down the work-product doctrine.
In an obier
t dictum in Fortune Corp. v. Court of
Appeals, 229 SCRA 355, 372 (1994), the Supreme
Court stated that a bare allegation of the work
product doctrine" is not sufficient to grant a motion for
protective and limiting ordors, thereby implying that
such orders would be forthcoming if there is sufficient
showing of the applicability of the doctrine,"°

PHYSICIAN/PSYCHOTHERAPIST-PATIENT PRIVILEGE

Q

Discuss

the

physician/psychotherapist-patient

privilege.
A.

A physician, psychotherapist or person reasonably
believed by the patient to be authorized to practice
medicine or psychotherapy cannot in a civil case,
without the patient's consent, be examined as to any
confidential communication made for the purpose of
diagnosis or treatment of the patient's physical, mental
or emotional condition, including alcohol or rug
addiction, between the patient and his physician or
psychotherapist. This privilege also applies to persons,
including members of the patient's family, who have
participated in the diagnosis or treatment of the patient
under the direction of the physician or psychotherapist.""
(S24[c] R130, 2020 Rules of Evidence).

see also Santamaria v. Cleary, 793 SCRA 459,477 (2015)
Note that the requirement under the former tule that the information
would blacken the patient's reputation" has been deleted in the amended provision.
Also the privilege has been extended to psychotherapists and their patients

761

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

Who is a psychotherapist?

A.

A psychotherapist is:
a)

A person licensed to practice medicine engaged in
the diagnosis or treatment of a mental or emotional
condition,'

or

b) A person licensed as a psychologist by the govermment
while similarly engaged. (Id,).'
Q.

In a torts case filed by plaintiff against the defendant,
may the plaintiff's doctor, over the plaintiff's
objection, be called by the defense to testify
regarding the extent of the plaintiffs broken leg
which the doctor treated?

A.

No, upon objection that it would violate the physicianpatient privilege. While information regarding the
plaintiff's broken leg would not blacken his reputation,

the requirement regarding the blackening of the reputation
was deleted in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.
Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage against
her husband Panibugho and his paramour Kalunya.
May the court allow or give weight to the following
evidence presented by the prosecution over the
vigorous objections of the defense? Explain.
xXX

wre SC Committee's Explanatory Notes state that [/jar one to be
considered a 'psychotherapist' a mecica! doctor needs only to be 'license' to
practice medicine and does not need to be a psychiatrist, whereas a psychologist
mtst be 'licensed by the government." The statemert that a physician does not
need to be a psychiatrist seers arguable. Does ihe privilege apply for example
on pediatnican engageat in the diagnosis and treatment of mertal or emotional
conditions? It seems it should not unless the patient reaspnably thought he was
authorized to engage in the practice of psychiatry,
yr g psychotherapist is licensed as a psychologist, he would also be
goverred by RA. N. 10029 &r the Philippine Psychology Act of 2009. Secicn
30 Of RR.A. No 10029 provides for a psychologist-patient privilege There are
differences between Sec. 30 of RA. No. 10029 and $24(0) R130, for lr stance
the psychologist-patient privilege applies In criminal or administrative proceedings

762

Paro! Evidence Rule

(c) Testimony of Dr. Mediko, the obstetrician who
conducted a dilation and curettage (D & C)
operation on Kalunya for vaginal bleeding and
to whom confidential information essential for
treatment was given by Kalunya regarding her
affair with Panibugho. (86 Bar Q10c).
A.

Yes, the court may allow the testimony of Dr. Mediko.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the physicianpatient privilege applies only to civil cases.
Here what is involved is a criminal prosecution
for concubinage. Hence Dr. Mediko's testimony is
admissible.

0.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged from
her husband Walter because of the latter's suspicion
that she was having an affair with Vladimir, a
barangay agawad who lived in nearby Mandaluyong.
Nenita lived in the meantime with her sister in
Makatl. One day, the house of Nenita's sister
inexplicably burned almost to the ground. Nenita
and her sister were caught inside the house but
Nenita survived as she fled in time, whlie her
sister tried to save belongings and was caught
inside when the house collapsed, As she was
running away from the burning house, Nenita was
surprised to see her husband also running away
from the scene. Dr. Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist
who lived near the burned house and whom
Walter medically consulted after the fire, also saw
Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the fire.
Coincidentally, Fr. Platlno, the parish priest who
regularly hears Walter's confession and who heard it
after the fire, also encountered him not too far
away from the burned house. Walter was charged

763

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

with arson and at his trial, the prosecution moved
to introduce the testimonies of Nenita, the doctor
and the priest-confessor, who all saw Walter at

the vicinity of the fire at about the time of the fire.
a) xxX

b) May the testimony of Or. Carlos, Walter's
psychiatrist, be allowed over Walter's objection?
(13 Bar 09b).
c) xxx

A.

b) Yes the testimony of Dr. Carlos may be allowed
over Walter's objection since the physician-patient privilege
applies only to civil cases. Moreover, Dr. Carlos'
testimony involved a fact which he did not acquire in
his professional capacity but as an ordinary witness.

Q.

Are autopsies conducted by medico-legal officers
or coroners covered by the privilege?

A.

No, since there is no patient or treatment involved, the
autopsy having been conducted on a dead person,

0.

Mrs. X was examined by a psychiatrist and
diagnosed to be suffering from schizophrenia.
Later Mr. X filed a petition for the annulment of his
marriage to Mrs. X. During the trial, the psychiatrist
was called as an expert witness. She was asked
questions to qualify her as a witness, she was
asked to render an opinion as to what illness the
drug stelazine is prescribed for, she was asked to
render an opinion on hypothetical facts respecting
the behavior of a fictitious person, and finally she
testified that she saw and treated Mrs. X but
without revealing her illness, the result of the
examination, and the medicines prescribed. Did
the psychiatrist's testimony violate the physicianpatient privilege?
764

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

No. An attending physician may testify as an expert
witness provided his opinion is based strictly upon the
hypothetical facts stated, excluding and disregarding

any personal knowledge of the patient acquired through
the physician-patient relationship (Lim v. Court of
Appeals, 214 SCRA 273 [1992])

0.

Petitioner wife filed a petition with the Family
Court for the declaration of the nufllty of her marriage
to her Respondent husband on the ground of the
latter's psychological incapacity, During the pretrial, Petitioner filed a request for the issuance of
a subpoena duces tecum addressed to the
hospital covering the Respondent's records for
alleged drug-addiction treatment and rehabilitation.
Respondent's lawyer objects to the motion invoking
the physician-patient privilege. Petitioner's lawyer
retorts that the objection is premature as the
records are not yet being offered in evidence and,
assuming that the objection is not premature, that
the physician-patient privilege bars only testimonial
evidence since it refers only to the disqualification
of the physician to testify on a matter learned in
confidence but does not otherwise bar the production
of documentary evidence. How should the court
rule on Respondent's objection? Explain.

A.

The court should sustain Respondent's objection,
The Petitioner's application for issuance of
subpoena is premature. She should wait for the trial
before making a request for the issuance of subpoena
duces tecum.
It is of course possible to treat Petitioner's motion
for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum covering
the hospital records as a motion for production of
documents under R27, a discovery procedure available

765

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

to a litigant prior to tnit.' j such a case, the
argument of Petitioner's lawyer that the objection is
premature would be without merit.

rder S1 R27, documents which are privileged
may not be the subject of a motion for production

Here the documents subject of a motion for
production were covered by the physician-patient
privilege. Hence the adverse party (Respondent) may
object to the motion on the ground that the documents
sought to be produced are privileged and may not be
the subject of a motion for production.

The argument of Petitioner's lawyer that the

physician-patient privilege bars only testimonial evidence
is without merit. The physician-patient privilege bars
not only the physician's testimony on the confidential
information but also the documents embodying such
confidential information. To compel the physician to
disclose such records would in effect be to compel
him to testify against the patient

Here the documents embody the confidential
information on Respondent's drug rehabilitation
obtained by the physician. Hence the same are also
barred under the physician-patient privilege. (Chan v.

Chan, 24 July 2013)

rpl statement of the court is ncorrect A motion for production under
RR27 can be directed only against s party. The hospital ard/or the physicians
were not party to the marriage nullicatior case. The appropriate procedure for
Petitioner to follow is to depose the physicians. ask them regarding the existence
of the documents, and then move for the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum
against the physicians or hospital to produce the documents. (See Hickman v
Taylor 329 U.S 495, 504). Of course in such s case, the patient could invoke
the physician-patent privilege with respect ta privileged documents as privileges
may be raise during the discovery stag.

766

Parol Evidence Rule

PSYCHOLOGIST/PSYCHOMETRICIAN-CLIENT
PRIVILEGE (S30 RA 10029)

0.

Discuss the psychologist/psychometrician-client
privilege.

A.

A psychologist or psychometrician cannot, without
the consent of the client/patient, be examined on any
communication or Information disclosed and/or acquired
in the course of giving psychological services to such
client. The protection accorded herein shall extend to
all pertinent records and shall be available to the
secretary, clerk, or other staff of the licensed
psychologist or psychometrician. Any evidence obtained
in violation of this provision shall be inadmissible for
any purpose in any proceeding. (S30 R.A. No. 10029)
Note that the privilege applies in any proceeding,
civil, criminal or administrative. Compare to the
physician/psychotherapist-patient privilege which applies
only to civil cases.
PRIEST'S/MINISTER'S PRIVILEGE

0.

Discuss the priest's/minister's privilege.

A.

A minister, priest or person reasonably believed to be
so cannot, without the consent of the affected person,
be examined as to any communication or confession
made to or any advice given by him, in his professional
character, in the course of the discipline enjoined by
the church to which the minister or priest belongs.
(S24[] R130, as amended by the 2020 Rales on
Evidence).

767

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

A priest was giving spiritual counseling to a
married couple with marital problems. During the
course of the counseling, the wlfe confessed that
she was having an affair with another man, In a
subsequent marriage nullity suit, may the prlest
testify over the wife's objection about her affair?

A.

No. S24(d) R130 as amended by the 2020 Rules on

Evidence

expanded

the

privilege

not

only

to

confessions but to other communications made to the
priest or minister or advice given by him. The priest

here was acting in his professional character when
giving spiritual advice to the married couple.
Q.

For over a year, Nenita had been estranged from
her husband Walter because of the latter's suspicion

that she was having an affair with Vladimir, a
barangay kagawad who lived in nearby Mandaluyong.
Nenita lived in the meantime with her sister in
Makati. One day, the house of Nenita's sister
inexplicably burned almost to the ground. Nenita
and her sister were caught inside the house but

Nenita survived as she fled in time, while her
sister tried to save belongings and was caught
inside when the house collapsed. As she was
running away from the burning house, Nenita was
surprised to see her husband also running away
from the scene. Dr, Carlos, Walter's psychiatrist
who llved near the burned house and whom
Walter medically consulted after the fire, also saw
Walter in the vicinity some minutes before the fire.
Coincidentally, Fr. Platino, the parish priest who
regularly hears Walter's confession and who heard it
after the fire, also encountered him not too far
away from the burned house. Walter was charged
with arson and at his trial, the prosecutlon moved

768

Parol Evidence Rule

to Introduce the testimonies of Nenita, the doctor
and the priest-confessor, who all saw Walter at
the vicinity of the fire at about the time of the fire.
a) xxx
b) xxx

c)

A.

May the testimony of Fr, Platino, the priestconfessor, be allowed over Walter's objection?
(13 Bar Q9c)

c) Fr. Platino's testimony that he encountered Walter
not too far away from the burned house may be
allowed over Walter's objection. Under the Rules of
Evidence, the priest's/minister's privilege applies only
to a communication or confession made to or advice
given by the priest in his professional character.
Evidently Fr, Platino was not acting in his professional
character when he encountered Waiter.

Ft. Platino however may not testify regarding
Walter's confession over his objection that the same
ls covered by the priest's/minister's privilege.
PUBLIC INTEREST PRIVILEGE

0.

Discuss the public interest privilege.

A.

A public officer cannot be examined during or after his
tenure, as to communications made to him_ in official
confidence, when the court finds that the public
interest would suffer by the disclosure. (S24[e] R130).

Q.

Banco Filipino filed a motion under Rule 27 of the
Rules of Court for the production of the tapes and
the transcripts of the Monetary Board deliberations
on the closure of Banco Filipino. The MB opposed

769
¥

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

said motion on the ground that these tapes and
transcripts are privileged pursuant to the public
interest privilege under the Rules of Evidence. ls
the MB's opposition meritorious?
A.

No. Under Section 24(e) of Rule 130, the public
interest privilege would arise if the court finds that the
public interest would suffer by the disclosure. The MB
has not established that public interest would suffer
by the disclosure. Considering that BF had already

been closed by the Central Bank, any disclosure of
the tapes and transcripts would pose no danger or
peril to the economy. (Banco Filipino v. Monetary
Board, 142 SCRA 523 [19861).

Executive Privilege
Q.

What is executive privilege?

A.

It is the privilege which protects the confidentiality of
conversations that take place in the President's
performance of his official duties. The privilege may
be invoked not only by the President but also by his
close advisors under the "operational proximity" test
(Neri v. Senate Committee on Accountability of Public
Officers and Investigations, G.R. No. 180643, 25
March 2008)

Q.

The Senate sought to question Mr. Romulo Neri, a
member of President Arroyo's cabinet, on whether
President Arroyo followed up the National
Broadband Network project (financed by Chinese
loans), whether she directed him to prioritize it,
and whether she directed him lo approve it. Mr.

he ruling is hight arguable. The reasoning that public interest would
not suffer because BF had a.ready been closed is somewhat narrow and takes
an ex post approach to the privilege It ignores the ex ante perspective f [he

privilege One of the public interests sought to bo protected is te free and
unfettered discussions during deliberations Disclosure of he eliberations would
clearly have a cbfng effect on such discussions.

770

Paro! Evidence Rule

Neri invoked executive privilege stating ttat his
conversations with the President dealt with delicate
and sensitive national security and diplomatic
matters relating to the impact of the scandal on
high government officlals and the possible loss of
confidence by foreign investors and lenders. May
Mr. Neri's invocation of executive privilege be upheld?
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court upheld Mr. Neri's invocation
of executive privilege (more specifically the presidential
communications privilege) stating that disclosure

might impair our diplomatic as well as economic
relations with China. The SC distinguished this from
U.S. v. Nixon, where there was an ongoing criminal
investigation into the Watergate break-in. (Neri v
Senate Committee on Accountability of Public Officers
and Investigations, G.R. NO. 180643, 25 March 2008)

0.

On May 23, 2005, the Committee on Tariff and
Related Matters (CTRM), an office under the National
Economic Development Authority (NEDA), held a
meeting in which it resolved to recommend to
President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo the lifting of
the suspension of the tariff reduction schedule on
petrochemicals and certain plastic products, thereby
reducing the Common Effective Preferential Tariff
(CEPT) rates on products covered by Executive
Order No. 161 from 7% or 10% to 5% starting July
2005. On June 9, 2005, Wilfredo A. Paras, then the
Chairman of the Association of Petrochemical
Manufacturers of the Philippines (APMP), the
main industry association In the petrochemical
sector, wrote to the CTRM Secretariat, through its
Director Brenda Mendoza, to request a copy of the
minutes of the meeting held on May 23, 2005.
Director Mendoza denied the request. The attitude

771

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

of the CTRM prompted the petitioner and the
APMP to bring the petition for mandamus in the
RTC to compel the CTRM to provide the copy of
the minutes and to grant access to the minutes,
invoking the constitutional right to information on
matters of public concern and the State's policy

of full public disclosure. May the CTRM be
compelled to provide the copy of the minutes and
to grant access to the minutes?

A

No. The right to information does not extend to
matters acknowledged as privileged information under
the separation of powers, which include Presidential
conversations, correspondences, or discussions during
closed door Cabinet meetings. A President and those
who assist him must be free to explore alternatives in
the process of shaping policies and making decisions
and to do so in a way many would be unwilling to
express except privately. It was imperative to ensure
and promote the free exchange of ideas among the
members of the committee tasked to give tariff
recommendations to the President were truly imperative.
(Sereno v. Committee on Tariff and Related Matters,
1 February 2016, Bersamin, J.).

Deliberative Process Privilege
Q.

What is the deliberative process privilege

A.

The deliberative process privilege protects from
disclosure advisory opinions, recommendations, and
deliberations comprising part of a process by which
governmental decisions and policies are formulated.
Written advice from a variety of individuals is an
important element of the govemment's decision-making
process and the interchange of advice could be stifled
if courts forced the government to disclose those
recommendations; thus, the privilege is intended to

772

Paro! Evidence Rule

prevent the "chilling" of deliberative communications.
(Department of Foreign Affairs , BCA International
Corp., 29 June 2016, Carpio, 4.). An example would
be court deliberations and court sessions. (Id.),
Q.

In an Amended Build-Operate-Transfer Agreement
(Agreement), the Department of Foreign Affairs
(OFA) awarded the Machine Readable Passport
and Visa Project (MRPN Project) to BCA International
Corporation (8CA), a domestic corporation, During
the implementation of the MRPN Project, DFA
sought to terminate the Agreement. However,
BCA opposed the termination and filed a Request
for Arbitration, according to a provision in the
Agreement. An ad hoc arbitral tribunal was
constituted. BCA filed before the RTC a Petition
for Assistance in Taking Evidence pursuant to the
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the
Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004 (RA
9285). In its petition, BCA sought the Issuance of
subpoena ad testificandum and subpoena duces
tecum to witnesses and documents in the DFA's
custody. The DFA opposed the issuance of
subpoenas on the ground that the witnesses and
the documents sought related to deliberations by
the DFA on the award of the MRPN Project and
would thus violate the deliberative process privilege.
The RTC granted the application for Issuance of
subpoenas. According to the RTC, acts, transactions
or decisions are privileged only before a definite
proposition is reached by the agency and since
DFA had already made a definite proposition and
entered into a contract, DFA's acts, transactions
or decisions were no longer privileged. Was the
RTC correct in its reason for not applying the
deliberative process prlvllege?

773

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The privileged character of the information does
not end when an agency has adopted a definite
proposition or when a contract has been perfected or
consummated; otherwise, the purpose of the privilege
will be defeated. The deliberative process privilege
applies if its purpose is served, that is, to protect the
frank exchange of Ideas and opinions critical to the

government's decision-making process where disclosure
would discourage such discussion in the future. The
question is not whether the decision has been
implemented, or whether sufficient time has passed,

but whether disclosure of these preliminary proposals
could harm the agency's future decision-making by
chilling either the submission of such proposals or
their forthright consideration. (Department of Foreign
Affairs v. BCA International Corp., 29 June 2016,
Carpio. J.)
Q.

If a privileged communication falls into the hands
of a third person, will the communication still
remain privileged?

A.

Yes. The communication shall remain privileged, even
in the hands of a third person who may have obtained
the information, provided that the original parties to

the communication took reasonable precaution to
protect its confidentiality (S24 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence). This is a significant new provision in the
2020 Rules which overrides previous rulings that the
communication shall lose its privileged character if it
falls into the hands of a third person.
The communication shall also remain privileged

if there was collusion between one of the parties to
the privileged communication and the third party.
(People v. Carlos, 47 Phil. 626)

774

Parol Evidence Rule

Informant's Privilege
Q.

Is the name and identity of an informant on a
suspect In the crime of terrorism confidential?

A.

Yes. Under Section 51 of the Human Security Act, the
name and identity of an informant on a suspect in the
crime of terrorism shall be considered confidential
and shall not be unnecessarily revealed until after
the proceedings against the suspect shall have
been terminated.

Media Practitioner's Privilege

a.

What is the Media Practitioner's Privilege?

A.

Without prejudice to his liability under the civil and
criminal laws, any publisher, owner, or duly recognized
or accredited journalist, writer, reporter, contributor,
opinion writer, editor, columnist, manager, media
practitioner involved in the writing, editing, production,
and dissemination of news for mass circulation, of any
print, broadcast, wire service organization, or electronic
mass media, including cable TV and its variants,
cannot be compelled to reveal the source of any news
item, report or information appearing or being reported or
disseminated through said media, which was related
in confidence to the abovementioned media practitioners.

(R.A. No. 11458)
Q.

ls the privilege subject to an exception?

A.

Yes. Revelation can be compelled if a court, or the
House of Representatives, or the Senate or any
committee of Congress finds that such revelation is
demanded by the security of the State. (Id.).

775

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

What is the purpose of the privilege?

A.

The privilege serves to advance the public's right to
information by encouraging informants to disclose
information to media practitioners. Without the privilege,
informants would be reluctant to communicate
information for fear of reprisal or harassment.

Privilege against self-incrimination
Q.

What is the privilege against self-incrimination?

A.

It is a constitutional privilege which provides that no
person shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself. (Art. III, Section 17, Constitution).

Q.

In what proceedings may the privilege be invoked?

A.

The privilege may be invoked not only in criminal
cases, but in civil, administrative, and legislative
proceedings wherein the person may be exposed to a
liability which is penal in nature. Hence the privilege
may be invoked in an administrative proceeding
where a doctor's license may be cancelled (Pascual
• Board of Medical Examiners, 28 SCRA 345) or
where a person's property may be forferted pursuant
to proceedings under the Anti-Graft Law (Cabal v
Kapunan, 6 SCRA 1064)

Q.

What is the nature of the evidence which is
excluded by the privilege?

A.

The privilege excludes evidence which is testimonial
in nature, This is clear from the tenor of the
Constitutional provision which provides that "[n]o
person shall be compelled to be a witness against
himself." (Italics supplied). Hence it cannot be invoked
to bar documentary or object evidence. In other words

776

Parol Evidence Rule

a person can be compelled to produce evidence, not
privileged, for use against him, except that he may not
be compelled to testify against himself.
Q.

May a court compel a person to provide blood and
other bodily samples for purposes of DNA or
forensic testing over the person's objection that it
will violate his right against self-incrimination?

A.

Yes. The privilege against self-incrimination applies only
to testimonial compulsion. Hence it is not applicable
to the case where a person ls directed to produce
blood and other bodily samples, (People v. Yatar,
GR. No. 150224, 19 May 2004), or to submit to a physical
examination (People v. Gallardo, G.RR. No. 133025, 27
February 2000), or to undergo ultra-violet examination
to detect fluorescent powder dusted on the buy-bust
money (People v. Tranca, 35 SCRA 455),

Q.

Accused police officer was arrested for extortion
after an entrapment operation. He was compelled
to undergo a drug test by submitting his urine
sample. The urine sample tested positive for
drugs. Accused was convicted of the crime of use
of dangerous drugs under Section 15, Art. II of the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act (R.A, 9165).
He challenged the admissibilty of the urine sample
on the ground that his drug testing violated his
right against self-incrimination. Was the urine
sample properly admitted in evidence?

A.

No. The drug testing violated the accused's right
against self-incrimination. The drug test in Section 15
of RA 9165 covers only those arrested for crimes under
Art. II of RA 9165. Here the accused was arrested for
extortion not for dangerous drug use.

777

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

The rule is that the right against self-incrimination
is a prohibition against testimonial compulsion. Cases
where non-testimonial compulsion has been allowed
reveal, however, that the pieces of evidence obtained
were all material to the principal cause of the arrest
In the instant case, a urine sample is immaterial
to the charge of extortion, It Is thus erroneous to hold
that the extraction of petitioner's urine for purposes of

drug testing was "merely a mechanical act, hence,
falling outside the concept of a custodial investigation."
(Dela Cruz v. People, 730 SCRA 655 [2014])
Q.

May a person resist a subpoena for the production of

private books and papers to be used against him
on the ground that it would violate the privilege
against self-incrimination?
A.

It depends on whether the private books and papers
contain testimonial declarations of the person asserting
the privilege. If they do, then the privilege may be
invoked for to compel the person to produce the
books and papers is tantamount to compelling him to
testify against himself.
On the other hand if the books and papers, even
if private, do not contain testimonial declarations, then
the privilege may not be invoked. The privilege applies
only to testimonial compulsion not to a compulsion to
produce evidence. (See Fisher v. United States, 425
US 391 [1976] cf. Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S.

616 (18861).

teeteonial declarations have been defined as "statements that were
made under circumstances which would lead an objective witness reasonably to
believe that the statement would be available tr tse at a later trial. (See
Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 [2004]. Testimnoniel statements means
statements wherein the person making them knows that they can or may be used

in court

778

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

A taxpayer, whc was under Investigation for
possible civil or criminal liability under the federal
income tax laws, obtained from his accountant
workpapers relating to the accountant's preparation
of his tax returns. May the taxpayer be compelled
by subpoena to deliver to the court the workpapers
despite the taxpayer's invocation of the privilege
against self-incrimination?

A.

Yes. The privilege against self-incrimination applies
only to testimonial compulsion. A subpoena served on
a taxpayer requiring him to produce an accountant's
workpapers in his possession without doubt involves
substantial compulsion. But it does not compel oral
testimony; nor would it ordinarily compel the taxpayer
to restate, repeat, or affirm the truth of the contents of
the documents sought, Therefore, the Fifth Amendment
would not be violated by the fact alone that the
papers, on their face, might incriminate the taxpayer,
for the privilege protects a person only against being
incriminated by his own compelled testimonial
communications. The accountant's workpapers are
not the taxpayer's They were not prepared by the
taxpayer, and they contain_no testimonial declarations
by him. (Fisher • United States, 425 US 391 [1976])
Note: Fisher undercuts the "privacy' test of Boyd.
The clear implication in Fisher is that the production of
papers or documents, even if private, may be
compelled If these do not contain any testimonial
declarations or evidence. Testimonial evidence is an
assertion by an individual of the truth or falsity of a
fact. (1 WIGMORE, EVIDENCE $$ 24, 25 at 396-401
[3d ed. 19401).

779

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

May a person be compelled to write on paper in
order to produce a handwriting sample for use in
evidence against him?

A

No Writing is more than moving the body, it is not a
purely mechanical act but requires the application of
the intelligence and attention. In effect a person is
compelled to make evidence against himself and this
violates his right against self-incrimination. (Beltran v.
Samson, 50 Phil. 570 [19291).

Beltran went so far as to state that a person may
not be compelled to produce previously handwritten
documents (handwriting exemplars) to be used in

evidence against him but this part of the ruling is
arguable. In the United States, a person may be compelled
to produce handwriting exemplars without infringing
upon the Fifth Amendment. (Gilbert v. Califormla, 388
U. $. 263, [1967))
Q.

A.

When may a person invoke the privilege?
In the case of an accused, he may invoke the
privilege at the outset and refuse to take the witness

stand altogether. Hence an accused cannot be
compelled to testify, either by the prosecution or
during his turn to present evidence. A witness who is
not the accused however may not refuse to take the
witness stand and he can invoke the privilege only

when an incriminatory question is asked of him.
Parental & Filial privilege
Q.

Discuss the parental and filial privilege.

A.

No person shall be compelled to testify against his
parents, other direct ascendants, children or other
direct descendants, except when such testimony is
indispensable in a crime against that person or by one
780

Parol Evidence Rule

parent against the other. (S25 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence). The italicized exceptive clause was added
by the 2020 amendments.
The parental privilege refers to the privilege of

the parent or other direct ascendant while the filial
privilege refers to that of the children or other direct
descendant.

0.

Who can invoke the parental and filial privilege?

A.

Note that the privilege is invoked not by the person
against whom a witness will testify but by the witness
himself. In other words, under these privileges a witness
may not be compelled to testify against another. This
is an exception to the general rule that a witness may
be compelled to testify against another.

Q.

The prosecution presents as witness the accused's
son. May the accused object to the presentation
of the son on the basis of the filial privilege?

A.

No. The privilege belongs to the witness himself not
to the party in a case. If the son chooses to testify
against the father, the latter cannot do anything about
it. The child may opt not to testify against his father
but the option is with him not the father.

Q.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage against
her husband Panibugho and his paramour Kalunya,
May the court allow or give weight to the following
evidence presented by the prosecution over the
vigorous objections of the defense? Explain.
XXX

(b) Testimony of Matanda, Panibugho's mother,
who is angry at her son for his immoral
behavior. (86 Bar Q10b)

781

PRIMER-RE
VIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

The court may allow the testimony of Matanda.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the filial privilege

belongs to the witness, not to the party in a case.
While Matanda cannot be compelled to testify against
her son, she cannot be barred from testifying if she
wants to.
Q.

May a stepmother be compelled to testify against
her stepdaughter?

A.

Yes. The parental privilege does not apply since the
same covers only direct ascendants and direct
descendants, and a stepdaughter is not a direct
descendant of the stepmother. (Lee y, Court of
Appeals, 13 July 2010, Abad, J.)

Trade Secrets Privilege
0.

What is the trade secrets privilege?

A.

A person cannot be compelled to testify about any
trade secret, unless the non-disclosure will conceal
fraud or otherwise work injustice. When disclosure is
directed, the court shall take such protective measure
as the Interest of the owner of the trade secret and of
the parties and the furtherance of justice may require.
(S26 R130). This is a new provision introduced by the
2020 Rules and which was based on the case of Air
Philippines Corp. v. Pennswell Inc., G.R. No. 172835,
13 December 2007.

Q.

Air Philippines Corporation (APC) purchased
chemical lubricants from Pennswell, a company
that manufactures and sells aviation lubricants.
Pennswell sued APC for unpaid purchases. In its
answer, APC alleged that Pennswell had undertaken
to deliver lubricants of the type belonging to a
new line, but that the second batch of lubricants
782

Parol Evidence Rule

delivered turned out to be of the same type as the
first batch. APC wanted to prove fraud by
showing the court the chemical composition of
Pennswoll's lubricants. During trial, it filed a
motlon under Rule 27 to compel Pennswell to give
a detailod list of the chemical ingredients and
composition of their lubricants. Pennswell objected,
claiming that the list constitutes trade secrets
which it could not be forced to divulge. It argued
that its products are specialized lubricants, and if
their components were revealed, its business
competitors could easily Imitate and market the
same types of products. May Pennswell be
compelled under Rule 27 to disclose the chemical
ingredients and composition of its lubricants?

A.

No. While under Rule 27, a party may move for an
order requiring the production or inspection of objects
or tangible things, such objects or things must not be
privileged. Here the chemical composition and ingredients
of the lubricants are trade secrets. A trade secret is "a
secret formula or process not patented, but known
only to certain individuals using it in compounding
some article of trade having a commercial value"
Trade secrets are privileged matter whose disclosure
is proscribed and penalized under tho Securities
Regulation Code and under the Revised Penal Code.
The chemical ingredients and composition of the
aviation lubricants of Pennswell clearly fall within the
definition of trade secrets and are thus privileged. (Air
Philippines Corp. v. Pennswell In., G.R. No. 172835,
13 December 2007).
Under the 2020 Rules on Evidence, disclosure
may be compelled under the fraud exception but the
court shall take protective measures.

783

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
EXTRAJUDICIAL ADMISSIONS
Q.

What is an admission by a party-opponent?

A.

It is an act, declaration, or omission of a party as to a
relevant fact and which may be given in evidence
against him. It is also called a party admission or
admission by party-opponent. (FRE 801[][2])

Q.

What is the reason for the rule that a party's
admission may be given in evidence against him?

A.

The admissibility of a party admission does not rest
upon the fact that it is against the interest of the party
but upon the adversary theory. of litigation. A party
can hardly object that he had no opportunity to crossexamine himself or that he is unworthy of credence
save when speaking under the sanction of an oath
(Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. No. 146710-15, 3 April 2001).
The use of the word "admission against Interest"
is somewhat misleading, implying that the act,
declaration, or omission must be "harmful" or against
the party's interest. This is not the case however. The
mere fact that the act, declaration, or omission is
being offered against the party who made it would
already constitute this as a party admission. In this
aspect, a party admission must be distinguished from
a declaration against interest which requires that the
same is against the declarant's interest.'
To illustrate, Defendant's statement that he had
paid his debt to the Plaintiff is not against Defendant's
interest but is in fact favorable to him. Plaintiff may

any authors state that party admissions must be against the party's
interest. This is not altogother correct, although it may be said tat the fact that
the act, declarat on, or omission is being offered against a party would in a sense
maka them against interest" (ANTONIO R BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 187)

784

Parol Evidence Rule

however introduce it in evidence to prove that there
was indeed a loan contract between him and the
Defendant.
Q.

If the act, declaration, or omission is being offered
in favor of a party, are they admissible In evidence?

A.

No since they would be self-serving and hearsay.
(ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 187
[2004 ed.]). Self-serving statements are those made
by a party out of court advocating his own interest.
(People
Omictin, 29 July 2010). They cannot be
characterized as admissions of a party for they are
not given in evidence against him but for him. They
are inadmissible on the ground of hearsay unless
independently relevant or within a hearsay exception.

Q.

What Is the difference between a confession and
an admission?

A.

A confession is one wherein a person acknowledges
the guilt of a crime.
admission.

Q.

It is just a broader form of an

Distinguish an extrajudicial admission from a
judlclal admission.

A.
EXT RAJ UDICIAL
--- ADMISSION

_

JUDICIAL ADMISSION
.;_

Made outside of
the proceedings in the
same case.

Made in the course of the
proceedings in the same case.

Must be offered in
evidence in order to be
considered by the court.

Need not be offered in
evidence since they already
form part of the records.

----785

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

May be given in evidence
against the admitter

Not only is it evidence against
the admitter but is binding
upon him.

May be contradicted by

May not be contradicted by the
admitter except by showing
that the admission was made
through palpable mistake or
that the imputed admission
was not, in fact, made.

the admitter

($4 R129)
Q.

Distinguish a party admission from a declaration
against interest.

A
PARTY ADMISSION

DECLARATION AGAINST
INTEREST

Made by a party.

Made by a non-party. i.e., the
declarant.

Need not be against the

Must be against the

admitter's interest.

declarant's interest

Not hearsay and thus

Hearsay but admissible as an

admissible

exception to the hearsay rule.

No requirement that the
admitter is dead or unable
to testify.

The declarant must be dead or
unable to testify.

Admissible only against

Admissible against the

the admitter

declarant and third persons.

---

786

Paro! Evidence Rule

Q.

What are the forms which an admission may
take?

A.

An admission may be in the form of an act, a
declaration or statement, or an omission (ASO).

0.

Give examples of acts as admissions.

A
1) Voluntary participation in the police re-enactment
of a crime

2) Flight from the scene of a crime,

3) Changing one's appearance or name.
4) Transfer of property.
Q.

Flight is evidence of guilt. ls non-flight evidence
of innocence?

A.

By itself, non-flight is not evidence of innocence.
(Eduarte v. People, 16 April 2009). However, accused's
non-flight, when taken together with the numerous
inconsistencies in the circumstantial evidence the
prosecution presented, may provide the sufficient
basis to acquit an accused. It is contrary to human
experience for one who is guilty to remain at crime
scene. (People v. Credo, 22 July 2019, Carandang, J.)

Q

May an offer of compromise be considered as an
admission of liability by the offeror?

A.

It depends. In civil cases, an offer of compromise is
not an admission of liability and is not admissible in
evidence against the offeror. Neither is evidence of

conduct nor statements made in compromise negotiations
admissible, except evidence otherwise discoverable

or offered for another purpose, such as proving bias

787

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME It

or prejudice of a witness, negativing a contention of
undue delay, or proving an effort to obstruct a criminal
investigation or prosecution. (S28 R130, 2020 Rules
on Evidence).

However,

in

criminal

cases,

an

offer

of

compromise by the accused may be received in
evidence as an implied admission of guilt. Excepted
from this rule are offers of compromise in criminal
cases involving quasi-offenses or those allowed by
law to be compromised. (S27 R130)
Q.

D's truck smashed into P's car and destroyed it.
P sued D for damages. D offered to compromise
by paying P450,000 to P. May P introduce the offer
to prove the value of the car?

A.

Yes. While the offer is not admissible to prove D's
admission of liability, it may be offered to prove
something else, such as the fair estimate of the value
of the property subject of (he settlement proposal.
(Varadero de Mania
l v. Insular Lumber, 46 Phil. 176)

Q.

Plaintiff sued defendant for injuries. Plaintiff alleged
that while she was a passenger in defendant's
car, the latter recklessly drove his car at high
speed and thus hit another car, causing injuries to
the plaintiff, Defendant produced driver of other
car to testify that defendant was driving slowly.
On cross-examinatlon, the plaintiffs lawyer sought
to Inquire from the witness if she had been paid
by the defendant by way of settlement. The
defendant's lawyer objected to the question on
the ground that it related to an offer of
compromise which is not admissible. Should the
objection be sustained?

788

Paro! Evidence Rule

A.

No. Evidence of conduct or statements made In
compromise negotiations is admissible when offered
not for the purpose of proving liability but of proving
bias or prejudice of a witness. Here the purpose of
showing the payment of settlement money to the
witness was to prove the witness's bias or prejudice in
favor of the defendant. (See Fenberg v Rosenthal,
109 N.E.2d 402)

Q.

Is the accused's offer to marry the rape victim an
implied admission of guilt?

A.

Yes. (People v. Bulos, G.R. No. 123542, 26 June 2001)

Q,

The accused was the suspect In the murder of his
wife. Upon meeting his sister-in-law, the accused
ploaded for her forgiveness. May this be received
in evidence as an implied admission of guilt?

A.

Yes. The accused's act of pleading for his sister-inlaw's forgiveness may be considered as analogous to
an attempt to compromise, which can be received in
evidence as an implied admission of guilt under S28
R130. (People v. Espanol, 13 February 2009)

Q.

The wife of the accused offered P25,000 to the
rape victim's mother to dissuade her from filing a
case. At the time the offer was made, no criminal
complaint had yet been filed against the accused,
although the accused's wife was already aware of
the rape Incident. May this offer be received in
evidence against the accused as an Implied
admission of guilt?

A.

Yes, since it is an attempt to compromise. An offer to
compromise does not require that a criminal complaint be
first filed before the offer can be received in evidence
against the offeror. What is required is that after
committing the crime, the accused or his representative

789

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

makes an offer to compromise and such offer is
proved. (People vs. Yparraguirre, 268 SCRA 35, 41
[1997]) It may be argued that the offer of compromise
should not be so received since it it res inter alios
acta. See People v. Erguiza, infra.

0.

X's parents heard that X had been accused by the
parents of AAA of raping their 13-year-old daughter.

X's parents went to the house of AAA and offered
to her parents P500,000 for the settlement of the
case but nothing came out of it. X was later
prosecuted for raping AAA. X testified that he did
not ask his parents to settle the case. May the
prosecution offer in evidence the settlement offer
as evidence of X's guilt?

A.

No. The offer made by X's parents is res inter alios

acta and does not bind X.
The Supreme Court has held that an offer of
compromise from an unauthorized person cannot
amount to an admission of the party himself. Although
it was held in some cases that an attempt of the
parents of the accused to settle the case is an implied
admission of guilt, the better rule Is that for a
compromise to amount to an implied admission of
guilt, the accused should have been present or at
least authorized the proposed compromise. (People v.
Erguiza, 571 SCRA 634, 650 [2008))
Q.

Pedro was charged with homicide for having
hacked Ramon to death. Before the case could be
tried, the heirs of Ramon sought out Pedro and
discussed with him the possibility of settling the
case. Pedro agreed to a settlement. When the
heirs asked how much he was wilting to pay,
Pedro offered P30,000 which the heirs accepted.
ls the agreement to settle as well as the offer to

790

Paro Evidence Rule

pay P30,000 by Pedro admissible in evidence
against him as an implied admission of guilt?
Explain. (89 Bar Q11).

A.

Yes. Under S28 R130 an offer of compromise by the
accused may be received in evidence as an implied
admission of guilt. It does not matter who initiated the
compromise talks just so long as the accused made
an offer.

Q.

X, charged with rape with homicide, offered
P100,000 as amicable settlement to the family of
the victim. The family refused. During the trial,
the prosecution presented in evidence X's offer of
compromise. What is the legal implication of such
offer? Explain. (96 Bar 015-3)

A.

The legal implication of such offer is that it may be
received in evidence as an implied admission by X of
his guilt. Under S28 R130 an offer of compromise by
the accused may be received in evidence as an
implied admission of guilt.

0.

Ms. Kalalo is a dealer of San Miguel Beer. She
Issued checks to SMC for the payment of beer but
the checks were dishonored. SMC sent a demand
letter to Kalalo for the value of the dishonored
checks. In the face of constant threats by SMC
agents, Kalalo sent a letter to SMC through
counsel in which she stated that she could not
pay due to collection difficulties and in which she
proposed a compromise settlement by paying the
outstanding balance In installments. SMB rejected
the compromise offer and later filed a B.P. Big. 22
case against Kalalo, May Kalalo's offer of
compromise be received in evidence as an implied
admission of her guilt?

791

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The offer of compromise was made prior to the
filing of the criminal complaint against her for a
violation of the Bouncing Checks Law. The offer of
compromise was clearly not made in the context of a
criminal proceeding and hence cannot be considered
as an implied admission of guilt. (San Miguel Corp, v.
Kalal0, 672 SCRA 401, 408 [2012], Sereno, 4.)."

Q.

A fight broke out between 8 and C, as a result of
which C was hospitalized. B offered to pay for C's

medical and hospitalization expenses which C
declined. May such offer to pay be admitted In
evidence against B as proof of criminal liability for
the injury?

A.

No. An offer to pay or the payment of medical,
hospital or other expenses occasioned by an injury is
not admissible in evidence as proof of civil or criminal
liability for the injury. (S27 R130). This provision is
also known as the "good Samaritan" rule. (CHRISTOPHER
MUELLER & LAIRD KIRKPATRICK, EVIDENCE:
PRACTICE UNDER THE RULES 352 [2 ed.)). The
evidence is barred on grounds of social policy. By
barring adverse evidentiary use, the rule encourages
citizens to act on their humane impulses. (Id.)

Q.

ls a withdrawn or unaccepted guilty plea admissible
In evidence against the accused?

A.

No. A plea of guilty later withdrawn or an unaccepted
offer of a guilty plea to a lesser offense, as in plea
bargaining, is not admissible in evidence against the
accused who made the plea or offer. Neither js any
statement made in the course of plea bargaining with

'cempsre with People • Yparraguirre, 268 SCRA 35, 41 (1997), 8
prosecution for rape, wherein it was statad that [aj offer t compromise does
not requite tat a criminal complaint be frst fled before the offer can be received
In evidence against the offeror." Te Kalal holing may be justified on the
reasoning that the offer was evidently in relation to the civil aspect of the case

792

Parol Evidence Rule

the prosecution, which does not result in a plea of
guilty or which_results_in a,glea of auitty later withdrawn
admissible. (S28 R130).'
Q.

A.

Panchito sued Dolphy for damages for injuries
that Panchito incurred when a badly rotted limb
fell from a curbside tree in front of Dolphy's home
and hit Panchito. At trial, Panchito offered testimony
that, a week after the accident, Dotphy had cut the
tree down with a chainsaw. ls the testimony
admissible to show an implied admission of
negligence on the part of Dolphy?
No. Evidence of post-accident repairs or subsequent

remedial measures are inadmissible to prove negligence
or wrong-doing since there is a public policy concern
of encouraging safety precautions or remedial
measures (FRE 407).

0.

What is the rule on admission by silence?

A.

Any act or declaration made in the presence and
within the hearing or observation of a party who does
or says nothing: (NP)

(1) when the act or declaration is such as naturally to
call for action or comment (ncac) if not true, and

(2) when proper and possible (propo) for him to do
so, may be given in evidence against such party
Q.

Give an example of admission by silence.

A.

Accused's silence when his wife's nephew asked him
why he killed his wife is an admission by silence under
S33 R130. (People v. Espanol, 13 February 2009)

re underscored portion was added by the 202¢ Rules on Evidence

793

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q

Prosecution of X for carnapping, Police investg
i ator

testifies that a bystander said in the accused's
presence and hearing that the accused was the
culprit to which the accused did not make any
reply. The defense objects on the ground that the
bystander's statement is hearsay, ls the objection
meritorious?
A.

No. An act or declaration made in the presence and
within the hearing or observation of a party who does

or says nothing when the act or declaration is such as
naturally to call for action or comment if not true, and
when proper and possible for him to do so, may be

given in evidence against him. (S33 R130). Here the
bystander's declaration was offered to show that the

accused did not reply thereto and thus to show an
admission by silence., Admission by silence is not
covered by the hearsay rule. (RICHARD LEMPERT 8
STEPHEN SALTZBURG, A MODERN APPROACH
TO EVIDENCE 365-66 (1982, 3" reprint 1988])

0.

Is the failure to respond to a demand letter an

implied admission of liability?
A,

No. Failure to respond to a demand letter is not an
implied admission of liability. A person does not make
a letter evidence by sending it to a party against
whom he wishes to prove the facts stated therein. He
can no more impose a duty to answer a charge than
he can impose a duty to pay by sending goods. (Phil
First Ins. Co. v. Wallem Phil's., G.R. No. 165647, 26
March 2009, Tinga. .)

Q.

In February 2008, South Entertainment Gallery,
Inc. (South Entertainment) received a Preliminary
Assessment Notice from the BIR informing it of Its
tax deficiencies. In April 2008, the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue {CIR) sent by registered mail a
Final Assessment Notice (FAN) to South Entertainment

794

Parol Evidence Rule

Subsequently, South Entertainment received a
Preliminary Collection Letter dated 10 June 2008,
demanding payment of its internal revenue tax
liabilities of P4,067,264.18. In its June 2008 lotter-reply to the Preliminary Collection Letter, South
Entertainment stated that it had already paid the
withholding tax deficiency and raised its exemption
from income tax and VAT deficiencies as
PAGCOR licensees. While it essentially assailed
the correctness of the deficiency assessments,
it did not raise any matter regarding its nonreceipt of the FAN.
Nonetheless, in June 2010, the CIR issued a
Warrant of Distraint and/or Levy against South
Entertainment. South Entertainment requested the
cancellation and withdrawal of the warrant, averring
that it did not receive any FAN. The CIR argued
that South Entertainment impliedly admitted receipt
of the FAN. ls the CIR's argument correct?
A.

Yes. An act or declaration made in the presence and
within the hearing or observation of a party who does
or says nothing when the act or declaration is such as
naturally to call for action or comment if not true, and
when proper and possible for him to do so, may be
given in evidence against him. (S33 R130)
The rule applies "to adverse statements in writing
if the party was carrying on a mutual correspondence
with the declarant." Here, South Entertainment was
communicating in writing with the CIR regarding the
assessment and collection of taxes. It had an interest
to object promptly to the existence and/or its receipt of
the FAN, as it would naturally have done if the
statement was not true. South Entertainment's silence
then may reasonably be construed as an admission

795

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

that it received the FAN referred to in the Preliminary
Collection Letter. (CIR v. South Entertainment Gallery,
Inc .. 17 March 2021, Leonen, J.).

Q

Pogi was

brought to the police station for

investigation on the alleged rape of Ganda. While

in the police station, Ganda pointed to Pogi and
said, "He's the one who raped me." Pogi remained
silent. May Pogi's silence be offered in evidence
as an implied admission of guilt?

A.

No. The rule on admission by silence does not apply
since Pogi had a right to remain silent while under
custodial investigation.

Q.

What is the doctrine of adoptive admission?

A.

Adoptive admission is where a party, by his words or

conduct, voluntarily adopts or ratifies another's statement
Evidence of the statement would then be admissible
against the party. (Republic v. Kenrick Dev't Corp
G.R. No. 149576, 8 August 2006).
Q.

A.

What is the res inter alios acta rule?

Res inter alios acta literally means "things done
among others." Under the law on evidence it means
the act, declaration, or omission of a third party. The
rule on res inter alios acta is found in $29 R130 which
provides that the rights of a party cannot be prejudiced by
an act, declaration, or omission of another. (Taer v
People, G.R. No. 85204, 18 June 1990). The rule's
meaning has also been extended to cover the similar

acts rule in S34 R130, although such usage is not
altogether precise since the similar acts rule involves
the acts of a party himself, not of others.

796

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

X and V were charged with murder. Upon
application of the prosecution, Y was discharged
from the Information to be utilized as a state
witness, The prosecutor presented Y as witness
but forgot to state the purpose of his testimony
much less offer it in evidence. Y testified that he
and X conspired to kill the victim but it was X who
actually shot the victim. The testimony of Y was
the only material evidence establishing the guilt
of X. Y was thoroughly cross-examined by the
defense counsel, After the prosecution rested its
case, the defense filed a demurrer to evidence
based on the following grounds:
(a) xxx

(b) Y's testimony is not admissible against X
pursuant to the rule on res inter alios acta.
Rule on the demurrer to evidence on the
above grounds. (03 Bar Q20ed).

A.

Demurrer to evidence denied,
(a) xxx
(b) The ground that Y's testimony is not admissible
against X pursuant to the rule on res inter alios
acta is untenable, The res inter alios acta rule
under S29 R130 applies only to acts, declarations,
and omissions which are extra-judicial,
Here Y's testimony was made in court and he
could be cross-examined as in fact he was crossexamined by X. Hence Y's testimony is admissible
against X

797

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
Q.

May the importer-consignee be held criminally
liable for false import declarations prepared and
signed by his customs broker?

A.

No, in the absence of proof of conspiracy between the
importer-consignee and his customs broker. To allow

to allow the act or omission of the customs broker to bind
the importer-consignee would be unacceptable under
the principle of res inter alios acta embodied in S29
R130. (Mercado v. People, 8 July 2015, Bersamin, 4.)
Q.

What is or are the exceptions to the res Inter alios
acta rule?

A.

The exceptions are the so-called vicarious admissions
under Sections 30 t0 32 of Rule 130. These are the
admissions by: (J CAPP)

1) Co-partner. (S30 R130)
2) Agent (Id.)

3)

Joint owner, joint debtor, or other person Jointly
interested with the party. (Id.)

4) Co-conspirator. (S31 R130),
5) Privies.
Q.

(S32 R130)

Discuss the rule on admission by co-partner or

agent. (SEE)
A,

The act or declaration of a partner or agent authorized
by the party to make a statement concerning the
subject or within the scope of his authority and during
the existence of the partnership or agency, may be
given in evidence against such party after the
partnership or agency is shown by evidence other
than such act or declaration. (S30 R130j 13

re addition of the phrase "authorized by the party to make a statemant
concerning the subject' was taken from FRF 801(0)2)¥O) which phrase ls not

798

Paro Evidence Rule

Q.

Does S30 R130 also refer to statements of an
employee within the scope of his employment?

A.

It is submitted that it does. Although S30 R 130 uses
the word "agent" and not "employee," the history and
rationale of the evidentiary rule in the United States
from where the provision was taken also considers
statements by employees within the scope of their
employment as vicarious admissions.'

Q.

Plaintiff, a guest in defendant's theater, slipped
and fell by reason of wet spots on the floor.
Plaintiff proposes to testify that after she fell, she
noticed a janitor mopping the floor and she heard
an usher say to the janitor, "Now you come when
it's too late, after someone falls. Why didn't you
come a half hour ago when I called you?" Would
such testimony be admissible over an objection
that it is res inter alios acta and hearsay?2'

A.

Yes. The statement was made by the usher within the
scope of her authority or employment and thus
binding upon her employer as a vicarious admission,
What the rule requires is that the statement concerns
a matter within the scope of the agency or employment
relationship. The rule does not require that the declarant
"have authority to bind its employer," because few
employers will authorize employees to make binding

found in the admissior by an agent or employee under FRE 801(0)(2)(0). It is
submitted that the phrase be deleted sine it could lead to the application of the
largely abandoned authorized admission doctrine." It ls also suggested tnat the
phrase within the scope of his authority'be changed to "within the scope of thgt
relationship" as found in FRE 801()2)(0) to make it clear that the partner or
agent does not need authorization to make the admission
"Jerome L. Gul, Vicarious Admissions and Utterances, 47 Marquette
Law Review 84 (1963). See also FRE 801()(2)(D) which considers as nonhearsey statements by an agent or employee cn a matter within he scope of the
relationship and wde it existed
rile hypotheticat is taken from ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA REMEDIAL

LAW QUIZZER 203 (2004 ed.)

799

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

admissions in litigation." since the statement is a
vicarious admission, it is also excluded from the
hearsay rule. This holding also finds support in S30
R130 which mentions "partner or agent authorized by

the party to make the statement concerning the
subject or within the scope of his or her authority."
Prof. Bautista's suggested answer is that the
objection should be sustained since the usher, while

an employee of the defendant, does not have
"speaking authority" to make such statements in order

to bind his defendant employee. However the "authorized
admission doctrine" has been largely abandoned by
the United States courts since it is unrealistic to expect
that employers would authorize employees to speak
on matters which may incriminate the employer."

0.

Plaintiff sues defendant store for a broken hip she
suffered after she slipped and fell at the store.
Plaintiff offers her testimony to the effect that
after her fall she overheard one of the grocery
checkers say that the floor had too much wax on
it. Defendant's lawyer objected to the offer on the
ground that the testimony relates to res inter allios
acta and to hearsay. Should the objection
be sustained?

A.

Yes. An employee's declaration about matters not
falling within his own scope of authority should not be
admissible against his employer. The grocery checker's
authority did not in any manner extend to the condition
of the floor. Since the grocery checker's out-of-court

"g
BMW
Ng
Ing. y. BMW of North Amenca_Inc, 974 F.2 1358.
1372 (3d Cir. 1992), ca1
denied. 113 $.Ct 1262 (1993) gee 4lg Advisory

Committee Note to Rule 801()(2XD), Woodman v,Haemooetics COr., 51 F.3d
1087, 1094 (1at Cir. 1995) (same)
�1 I�.

800

Paro! Evidence Rule

statement is not a vicarious admission, it Is also
inadmissible for being hearsay. (Mann v. Safeway
Stores, Inc, 518 P.2d 1194 [1974])

0.

Discuss the rule on admission by joint owner,
Joint debtor, or other person jointly interested
with the party.

A.

The act or declaration of a joint owner, joint debtor, or
other person jointly interested with the party within the
scope of his authority and during the existence of the
joint ownership, debt, or interest may be given in
evidence against such party after the joint ownership,
debt, or interest is shown by evidence other than such
act or declaration (SEE)

0.

Dand E are jointly indebted to P in the amount of
P600,000. E told P that the debt is not yet paid.
May P introduce this declaration in a suit by P
against D?

A.

No. E's statement is res inter alios acta, While S30
R130 speaks of "joint debtor" and "jointly interested,"
the term "joint" is used in the sense of "joint and
several" under American common law or "solidary" in
the Spanish continental law. (Jaucian v. Querol, 38
Phil, 707, 718). So S30 should be read to refer to
"co-owner," "solidary debtor," and "person solidarily
interested." Since E is a joint debtor rather than a solidary
debtor, his act or declaration is not binding upon D,

O.

Sometime in 1984, subdivision developer Ayala
Land, Inc. (ALI) sold a parcel of land to the
spouses Yuson. In 1987, the spouses Yuson sold
the land to the spouses Felipe and Mary Anne
Alfonso. A Deed of Restrictions was annotated
in TCT No. 149166 issued to the spouses Alfonso,
as had been required by ALI. The Deed of
Restrictions indicated that the property shall be

801

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

used exclusively for the establishment and
maintenance thereon of a preparatory (nursery
and kindergarten) school. The Deed of Restrictions
provides that the same may be enforced by ALI
and/or the homeowners' association.
ALI turned over the right and power to
enforce the restrictions on the properties in the
Ayala Alabang Village, including the above
restrictions on TCT No. 149166, to the association
of homeowners therein, the Ayala Alabang Village
Association (AAVA).
In 1989, the spouses Alfonso opened on the
same lot The Learning Child Center Pre-school
(TLC) a preparatory school which initially consisted
of nursery and kindergarten classes. In 1991, TLC
was expanded to include a grade school program,
the School of the Holy Cross, which provided
additional grade levels as the pupils who initially
enrolled advanced.

On October 13, 1992, AAVA filed with the
Regional Trial Court (RTC) of Makati City an
action for injunction against TLC and the spouses
Alfonso, alleging breach of contract by the
defendant spouses, particularly of the Deed of
Restrictions, the contents of which likewise appear
in the Deed of Absolute Sale.
During the trial, TLC introduced in evidence
statements of ALI that It had agreed to the
reclassification of the subject property as
institutional" and that the school was a "worthy
undertaking." AAVA argued that it is not bound
by these statements of ALI under the res inter
alias acta rule In S28 R130. ls AAVA's argument
tenable?

802

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

No, Acts and declarations of the developer AL! would
be binding upon AAVA in an action to enforce the
deed of restrictions on subdivision lots in Ayala
Alabang Village. This is because the deed of restrictions
provide that the same may be enforced by AU and/or
AAVA. Hence ALI is a person jointly interested with
AAVA within the purview of S29 R130. (The Leaming
Child Inc. v. Ayala Alabang Village Association, 7 July
2010, Leonardo-De Castro, J.).
Nole: Nonetheless the SC held that the statements
were not "damaging" to AAVA and ruled in its favor.
The ruling in TLCI v. AAVA seems to imply that since
the statements were not "damaging" to AAVA, the
latter was not bound by them. This is not altogether
correct since a party admission need not be against
interest. The more proper basis is that an extrajudicial
admission is not automatically binding upon an
admitter since it may be contradicted or explained by
the admitter.

Q.

MBMI a Canadian corporation, entered into a joint
venture with corporations A, B, and C. Redmont
Corporation filed a petition to cancel the mining
licenses of A, B, and C corporations on the ground
that the foreign equity exceeded 40%. The Court
of Appeals in finding on appeal that MBMI owned
more than 60% of the capital stock of corporations A,
B, and C, took into account the statements of
MBMI to that effect. Corporations A, B, and C
argued that MBMl's statements are res inter alios
acta since MBMI is not a party to the case. Is this
argument correct?

A.

No. The CA correctly applied S30 R130 on joint
interest. By entering into a joint venture, MBMI has a
joint interest with Corporations A, B, and C Hence its

803

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

statements in relation to such joint venture are an
exception to the res inter allos acta rule. (Narra Nickel
Mining Corp. v. Redmont Consolidated Mines Corp.,
21 April 2014)
Q.

State the rule on admission by privies.

A

Where one derives title to property from another, the
latter's act, declaration, or omission, in relation to the
property, is evidence against the former if done while
the latter was holding the title. (S32 R130).

Q.

A sold an alleged Amorsolo painting to B. B then
sold the painting to C. C sues B alleging that the
painting is not a genuine Amorsolo, During the
trial, may C present witness W who will testify that
he heard A say while he was the owner that the

painting was not a genuine Amorsolo over objection
that A's statement does not bind B and that the
same is hearsay?
A.

Yes C may present witness W to testify on what he
heard A say.
The statement binds B since it was made by a
privy of B. Where one derives title to property from
another, the latter's act, declaration, or omission, in
relation to the property, is evidence against the former
if done while the latter was holding the title. (S32
R130)
The statement being a party admission is not
hearsay and hence admissible. (FRE 801(d)(2), Estrada
v. Desierto, G.R. Nos, 146710-15, 3 April 2001)."°

1 jg statement would be res inter alios act f mado by him after he had
sold the painting to B.

804

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

State the rule on admission by a co-conspirator.

A.

The act or declaration of a conspirator in furtherance
of the conspiracy and during its existence, may be
given in evidence against the co-conspirator after the
conspiracy is shown by evidence other than such act
or declaration. (S31 R130 of the 2020 Rules on
Evidence). (FEE). The amendment under the new
rules consists of replacing "relating to" with "in
furtherance of."

Q.

What is the meaning of "in furtherance of in S31
R130?

A.

To prove that a statement has been made in
furtherance of a conspiracy it need be shown only that
the statement was intended to advance the objectives
of the conspiracy The federal courts in the U.S. have
read the requirement liberally, interpreting it to
encompass such evidence as declarations of future
Intent and statements unwittingly made to law
enforcement officials. For example, narrative statements
relating past events are not considered to have been
made in furtherance of a conspiracy, Additionally,
confessions made to law enforcement officials, and
statements which are conversational or mere bragging
do not satisfy the requirement. (Daniel R. Rizzolo,
Testing the Reliability of Coconspirators' Statements
Admitted under Federal Rule of Evidence 801[0)[2[E]
Putting the Claws Back in the Confrontation Clause,
30 VII L. Rev. 1565 [1985])

•

D and E conspired to rob the house of X. After
the robbery, FE bragged to W that he and D had
conspired to rob X's house and had obtained
P5,000,000. D was tried for robbery. S testified that
D and E conspired to rob X. The prosecution then
offered the testimony of W to prove what E
805

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
had bragged to him. May the testimony be
admitted in evidence over objection that it is res
inter alios acta?

A.

No. The statement of E is res inter alios acta and
does not bind D, The statement does not qualify as a
vicarious admission since it was made at a time when
the conspiracy had already ended. Additionally, the
statement was not In furtherance of the conspiracy
since it was merely a brag to a person not involved

with the conspiracy
Q.

A group of 3 persons, Andy, Buboy, and Cito,
robbed a house in a barrio, When they were
fleeing after the robbery, they were Intercepted by
the police, Shots were fired, and Andy was
mortally wounded. Before he passed away, but
conscious of his impending death, Andy admitted
his participation in the robbery, and named Buboy
and Cito as his companions and co-conspirators.
During the trial of Buboy and Cito for robbery, the
prosecution presented as its first witness Dodong
who testified that Andy, Buboy, and Cito had
planned to rob the house.

a)

Was the statement of Andy admissible as a
dying declaration? Explain.

b)

Was Andy's statement admissible against Buboy
and Cito as the statement of a coconspirator? Explain.

c)

May Andy's statement be presented against
Buboy and Cito on the ground that it is an
exception to the hearsay rule being a declaration
against interest?

806

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

a) No, the statement of Andy was not admissible as a
dying declaration.
Under the Rules on Evidence, a dying declaration
must relate to the circumstances surrounding his
death, (S37 R130]
Here the declaration did not relate to the
circumstances surrounding Andy's death but to his
and Buboy's and Cito's participation in the robbery.
Hence the statement was not admissible as a dying
declaration.
b)

No, the statement of Andy was not admissible
against Buboy and Cito as the statement of a coconspirator,

Under the Rules on Evidence, an extrajudicial
statement of a co-conspirator in order to be binding
upon the other co-conspirators must have been made
during the existence of the conspiracy. [S30 R130]
Hore the conspiracy was no longer existing when
Andy made the statement. Hence the same is not
binding upon Buboy and Cito.
c)

No, since the portion implicating Buboy and Cito
is not contrary to Andy's Interest.

0.

D and E conspired to rob the house of X. After
the robbery, E was arrested. During the trial of D
for robbery, may the prosecution present over
objection the testimony of E that he and D
conspired to rob X's house?

A.

Yes. The rule on res inter alios acta does not apply to
in-court testimony. The reason is that the opponent
would have the opportunity to cross-examine the witness.

807

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In an extrajudicial confession before the
Philippine National Police and NBI officers, A,
charged with murder, voluntarily admitted the charges,
but incriminated B and C as his co-conspirators,
Apprehended, B and C vehemently denied the
charge or any participation therein. Disregarding
however B and C's counsel's objection to the
admissibility of A's confession as against B and
C, the prosecution filed the corresponding
information against the two.

At the trial before the Regional Trial Court,
counsel for B and C again vigorously objected to
A's testimony. ls A's testimony on the witness
stand incriminating B and C admissible against
them? Reasons. (59 Bar)."
A.

Yes. The rule on res iter
n alios acta does not apply to
in-court testimony. The reason is that the opponent
would have the opportunity to cross-examine the witness.

Q.

What is a confession?
from an admission?

A.

A confession is a declaration of an accused
acknowledging his guilt of the offense charged, or of
any offense necessarily included therein. An accused's
confession may be given in evidence against him.
($34 R130). The confession referred to In $34 R130
is an extrajudicial confession. This should be
distinguished from a guilty plea which is covered by
S3 &4 R116.

How is it distinguished

Question sourced from 4 ABELARDO T, DOMONDON, 100 YEARS
OF THE BAR AND BF YOND IN REMEDIAL LAW 411-412 (20165 1ad.)

808

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

A.

May an extrajudicial confession be given in evidence
against a person other than the confessant?

No on the ground that a person may not be bound by

the act or declaration of another, It cannot be admitted

against his or her co-accused and is considered as
hearsay against them. (Salapuddin v, Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 184681, 25 February 2013). The
exception would be when the confession is used as
corroborative or circumstantial evidence as In the
case of interlocking confessions.
Q.

The accused made a confession to a Bantay
Bayan, a member of a barangay-based volunteer
organization in the nature of watch groups. While
making his confession the accused was not
assisted by counsel. Is his confession admissible
in evidence against him?

A.

No. Barangay-based volunteer organizations in the
nature of watch groups, as in the case of the "bantay
bayan," are recognized by the local government unit
to perform functions relating to the preservation of
peace and order at the barangay level. Thus, any
inquiry he makes has the color of a state-related
function and objective insofar as the entitlement of a
suspect to is constitutional rights provided for under
Article Ill, Section 12 of the Constitution, otherwise
known as the Miranda Rights, is concerned, (People
.Lauga, 15 March 2010, Perez, J.).19

' py te other hand, an accused's admissions before a barangay ano
and barangay officials p@de In ubli, with ather persons present, were nelc
admissible notwithstanding that the accusea was not afforded his Miranda rights
(People v. Sace, 5 April 2010)

809

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

What are interlocking confessions? (ICIC)

A.

Interlocking confessions are extrajudicial confessions
independently made without collusion which are
identical with each other in their essential details and
are corroborated by other evidence on record are
admissible as circumstantial evidence against the
person implicated to show the probability of the
latter's actual participation in the commission of the
crime. (People v. Molleda, 86 SCRA 667)

Q.

May an extrajudicial confession made by an accused
be sufficient ground for conviction?

A.

No, unless it is corroborated by evidence of corpus
delicti. (S3 R133).

Rights of a person under custodial investigation
Q.

What are the rights of a person under custodial
investigation?

A.

A person under investigation for the commission of an
offense (custodial investigation) shall have the following
rights: (SC VS)
(1) Right to remain silent and right to be informed of

such right.

(2) Right to have competent and independent counsel
preferably of his own choice and to be informed
of such right, If the person cannot afford the
services of counsel, he must be provided with
one. The right to remain silent and to counsel
cannot be waived except in writing and in the
presence of counsel
(3) The right against torture, force, violence, threat,
intimidation, or any other means which vitiate the
free will.

810

Parol Evidence Rule

(4) The right against secret detention places, solitary,
incommunicado, or other similar forms of detention
(siso). (Sec. 12, Art. III, Constitution)
Q.

What is the consequence if the confession or
admission was obtained in violation of the
foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation?

A.

Any confession or admission obtained in violation of
the foregoing rights of the person under custodial
investigation shall be inadmissible in evidence against
him. (Sec. 12[3], Art. III, Constitution)

Q.

During custodial investigation at the Western
Police District, Mario Margal was informed of his
constitutional right to remain silent and to have
competent and independent counsel. He decided
to waive his right to counsel and proceeded to
make a statement admitting commission of a robbery.
in the same statement, he implicated Antonio
Carreon, his co-conspirator in the crime.

a) ls Margal's statement admissible in evidence
against him?
b) ls it admissible against Carreon as an exception
to the res inter alios acta rule? (91 Bar Q13).
A.

a) Margal's statement is not admissible against him
Under the Constitution, the right of a person
under investigation for the commission of an offense
to remain silent and to counsel cannot be waived
except in writing and in the presence of counsel. Any
confession obtained in violation of this provision shall
be inadmissible in evidence against him. (Article II,
Section 12, Constitution),

811

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Here there is no showing that the waiver is in
writing and was made in the presence of counsel.
Hence Margal's statement is inadmissible against him.
b) No, Margal's statement is not admissible against
Carreon as an exception to the res inter alios
acta rule.
Under S31 R130, in order that the statement of a
conspirator may be given in evidence against a coconspirator, such statement must have been made
during the existence of the conspiracy.

Here the conspiracy had ended when Margal's
statement was made. Hence the same is inadmissible
against Carreon,
Q.

The barangay captain reported to the police that X
was illegally keeping in his house in the barangay
an Armalite M16 rifle. On the strength of that
information, the police conducted a search of the
house of X and indeed found said rifle. The police
raiders seized the rifle and brought X to the police
station, During the investigation, he voluntarily
signed a Sworn Statement that he was possessing
said rifle without license or authority to possess,
and a Waiver of Right to Counsel. Individually rule
on the admissibility in evidence of the:
a) Rifle;

b) Sworn Statement; and
c) Waiver of Right to Counsel ofX. (98 Bar 017)

A.

a) The rifle is inadmissible in evidence. Under the
Constitution, evidence seized without a valid search
warrant is inadmissible in evidence, Here the rifle was
seized without the police raiders being armed by any
search warrant.

812

Parol Evidence Rule

b) The sworn statement is inadmissible in evidence.
Under the Constitution, a person under custodial
investigation has the right to be informed of his
right to remain silent and his right to competent
and Independent counsel. Here X was not so
informed; hence the statement is inadmissible in
evidence against him pursuant to Section 12(3),
Art. III of the Constitution
c)

Q.

The Waiver of Right to Counsel of X is inadmissible
in evidence against him. Under the constitution,
the waiver of the right to counsel must be made in
the presence of counsel. Here the waiver was not
made in the presence of counsel; hence the same
is inadmissible in evidence against him pursuant
to Section 12(3), Art. III of the Constitution.

Arrested in a buy-bust operation, Edmond was
brought to the police station where he was
Informed of his constitutional rights. During the
investigation, Edmond refused to give any
statement. However, the arresting officer asked
Edmond to acknowledge in writing that six (6)
sachets of "shabu" were confiscated from him.
Edmond consented and also signed a receipt for
the amount of P3,OO0.O0, allegedly representing
the "purchase price of the shabu." At the trial, the
arresting officer testified and identified the documents
executed and signed by Edmond. Edmond's
lawyer did not object to the testimony. After the
presentation of the testimonial evidence, the
prosecutor made a formal offer of evidence which
included the documents signed by Edmond.

Edmond's lawyer objected to the admissibility
of the documents for being the "fruit of the
poisoned tree." Resolve the objection with reasons.
(09 Bar Q6).
813

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME l

A.

Objection sustained.

The Supreme Court has held that the signature
of an accused in a receipt of items seized which
signature was obtained without the assistance of
counsel is inadmissible in evidence the same being
tantamount to an uncounselled extra-judicial confession.
(Gutang v. People, 11 July 2000)
The objection to the documentary evidence was

made timely at the time these were offered in
evidence. It was premature to object to the documents

when they were merely being marked and identified.
Similar Acts Rule
Q,

What is the similar acts rule?

A

The similar acts rule provides that evidence that one
did or did not do a certain thing at one time is not
admissible to prove that he did or did not do the same
or similar thing at another time; but it may be received
to prove a plan, intent, knowledge, identity, custom, habit,
usage, system, and the like (PIKICHUS) (S35 R130).

Q.

The prosecution charges that on June 15, Andoy
possessed an ounce of shabu with Intent to sell.
Andoy admits the possession of the shabu but
insists that the same was for his personal use.
May the prosecution introduce evidence that
Andoy had sold shabu on May 1, May 15, and
June 1 over an objection that such would violate
the similar acts rule?

A.

Yes since the evidence of the prior acts of selling
would tend to show Andoy's intent to sell the drugs he
possessed on June 15.

814

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

The Defendants argued that Xaviervitle Estate Inc.
(XEI) had allowed them to pay the balance of the
purchase price of a subdivision lot in 120 monthly
installments. The Defendants introduced three
contracts to sell in which XEl granted two lot
buyers a 120-month term oft payment and a third
one a 180-month term. May these three contracts
to sen prove a habit or custom on the part of XEI to
grant 120-month terms of payments to its buyers?

A.

No. Under S35 R130, evidence that one did or did not
do a certain thing at one time is not admissible to
prove that he did or did not do the same or a similar
thing at another time; but it may be received to prove
usage, habit or custom.
Courts must contend with the caveat that before
they admit evidence of usage, habit, or pattern of
conduct, the offering party must establish the degree
of specificity and frequency of uniform response that
ensures more than
a mere tendency to act in a given
manner but rather conduct that is semi-automatic in
nature. In determining whether the examples are
numerous enough and sufficiently regular, the
key criteria are adequacy of sampling and uniformity
of response.

Here the Defendants did not introduce any evidence
that XE! and all the lot buyers in the subdivision had
executed contracts of sale containing uniform terms
and conditions. Moreover even in the 3 contracts
adduced by the Defendants there was no uniformity
as two referred to 120-month terms while the third
mentioned a 180-month term. (Boston Bank v. Manalo,
G.R. No 158149, 9 February 2006).

815

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

Q.

Alejo was stabbed in the abdomen. He immediately
called for help and a policeman promptly approached
him. He told the policeman that he felt he would
die from the serious wound inflicted on him by
Danilo who has a grudge against him. He was
brought to a hospital for treatment where, on the
same day, he was shot and killed by someone
whose identity could not be established by an
eye-witness. Eventually, Danilo was charged in
court for the death of Alejo, The prosecution had
to build its case on circumstantial evidence. At
the ensuing trial, the policeman was presented to
testify on the declaration made to him by Alejo.
The defense objected. Meeting the objection, the
prosecution argued for the admissibility of the
evidence as a dying declaration (ante mortem
statement) or as part of the res gestae, elther of
which, when deemed competent evidence as an
exception to the hearsay rule, would demonstrably
be relevant to the ultimate fact In lssue, the guilt
of Danilo for the death of Alejo. The defense
countered by arguing that no facts relevant to the
stabbing can be relevant to the shooting.

ls the contention of the prosecution with
respect to the relevancy and competency of
evidence correct? Discuss fully. (92 Bar 02).

A.

The argument of the prosecution with respect to
the relevancy and competency of the evidence is
not correct.

The statement of Alejo is not admissible as a
dying declaration because it did not relate to the
cause and circumstances surrounding his fatal shooting
The statement would have been admissible as
part of the res gestae since it was made immediately
after a startling occurrence, i.e., his stabbing. However it

816

Parol Evidence Rule

should not be received in evidence for it would violate
the similar acts rule. (S35 R130). Evidence that
Danilo stabbed Alejo is not admissible to prove that
Danilo was the one who shot Alejo. The defense
argument that no facts relating to the stabbing can be
relevant to the shooting was in substance an objection
based on the similar acts rule.
Q.

Give the sexual abuse shield rule in criminal
cases involving child abuse.

A.

Under the sexual abuse shield rule in criminal cases
involving child abuse, the following are not admissible:
(1) Evidence offered to prove that the allegec victim
engaged in other sexual behavior.
(2) Evidence offered to prove the sexual predisposition
of the alleged victim. (S30 Rule on Examination

of a Child Witness).
Q.

What is the exception to the sexual abuse shield
rule?

A.

Evidence of specific instances of sexual behavior by
the alleged victim to prove that a person other than
the accused was the source of the semen, injury, or
other physical evidence (siope) shall be admissible.
A party intending to offer such evidence must file

a pretra
i l motion at least 15 days before the trial
stating that he intends to offer such evidence in order
to prevent unfair surprise upon the other party. (S30

RECW),
Q.

Give the rape shield rule in rape cases.

A.

In prosecutions for rape, evidence of complainant's
past sexual conduct, opinion thereof or of his/her
reputation (PaSCOR) shall not be admitted unless,

817

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
and only to the extent that the court finds, that such
evidence is material and relevant to the case. (Sec. 6,
RA. No. 8505 [Rape Victim Protection & Assistance

Act])
Q.

Prosecution for rape where accused raises the
defense of consent. May accused introduce evidence
that complainant had extramarital sex with other
men over the relevant objection?

A.

No. Under the Rape Shield Rule, evidence of a rape
complainant's past sexual conduct is inadmissible
unless found by the court to be material and relevant
to the case, Here the evidence of sexual acts with

men other than the accused is irrelevant.

Even an

immoral woman has some freedom of selection. {See
U.S. v. Kasto (584 F.2 268 (1978])

HEARSAY RULE AND ITS EXCEPTIONS

a.

Define hearsay.

A.

Hearsay is a statement other than one made by the
declarant while testifying at a trial or hearing. offered
to prove the truth of the facts asserted therein. A
statement is (1) an oral or written assertion or (2) a
non-verbal conduct of a person, if it is intended by him
as an assertion.
A statement is not hearsay if the declarant
testifies at the trial or hearing and is subject to crossexamination concerning the statement, and the
statement is (a) inconsistent with the declarant's testimony
and was given under oath subject to the penalty of
perjury at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or in a
deposition; (b) consistent with the declarant's testimony
and is offered to rebut an express or implied charge

818

Parol Evidence Rule

against the declarant of recent fabrication or improper
influence or motive; or (c) one of identification of a
person made after perceiving him or hoer." (S37
R130).1
Another way of putting it is that hearsay is an
out-of-court statement made by a declarant which is
offered to prove the truth of the fact asserted therein.
Q.

What ls the hearsay rule?

A.

The hearsay rule provides that hearsay evidence is
inadmissible except as otherwise provided in the
Rules on Evidence. (S37 R130).

Q.

Give an example of hearsay.

A.

Pedro sues Dencio for damages when the latter's car
bumped into Pedro's car at an intersection causing
injuries to Pedro. Pedro offers the testimony of Winnie
who will testify that she heard bystander Sam say that
Dencio's car entered the intersection when the
stoplight was red against Dencio. Dencio's lawyer
may object to Winnie's proposed testimony on the
ground that Winnie will be testifying as to hearsay.
The statement of Sam that Dencio's car entered
the intersection when the light was stoplight was red
is hearsay. Clearly it is offered to prove the truth that
Dencio's car entered the intersection when the light
was red Winnie is also testifying as to a fact (Dencio's
car entering the intersection when the light was red)
which was not derived from her own perception but
from Sam's perception.

', as FRE 801(d(1)(C) puts it identifies a person as someone the
decarant perceived earlier.
rle is a new provlsion of the 2020 Rules on Evidence providing for a
more precise definition hearsay

819

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Note that what is hearsay is the out-of-court
statement or Sam's statement, not Winnie's testimony
reporting Sam's statement. (RICHARD LEMPERT &
STEPHEN SALTZBURG, A MODERN APPROACH
TO EVIDENCE 359 [2d ed., 1982 3d reprint 19881).
In court practice and in jurisprudence however the
hearsay definition is often extended to the witness's

testimony reporting the out-of-court statement
Q.

May hearsay be in written form?

A.

Yes. We often think of hearsay in its oral form but
hearsay may also be in writing. Hence if a party will
present a letter to prove the truth of the contents
thereof without presenting the letter-writer, the letter
would be hearsay. Affidavit of doctor absolving another
doctor from professional negligence is hearsay where
the affiant was not presented in court. (Rosit v. Davao
Doctors Hospital, 7 December 2015, Velasco, 4).°

Q.

May hearsay be non-verbal?

A.

Yes. Hearsay may consist of non-verbal conduct if the
same is intended by a person as an assertion. (FRE
801[a]).

Q.

In a police lineup, victim from behind a one-way
mirror points to the accused as the one who
assaulted him. The victim dies before trial. During
the trial, the police officer conducting the lineup is
asked who the victim pointed to as the culprit.
May the defense object and if so on what ground?

A.

Yes the defense may object on the ground of hearsay.
An "out-of-court statement" includes not only oral or
written assertions but also non-verbal conduct intended

"n

light ot the second paragraph of S37 RR130, an extrajudicial affidavit
would still be hearsay even if the affant is presented in court and subject to
cross-examination concerning the affidavit, unless it falls within any of the
hearsay exclusions under S37(a), (b), and (0) of R130

820

Parol Evidence Rule

as an assertion. (FRE 801[a]). The victim's act of
pointing out a person in the lineup is a nonverbal
assertion. It's as if the victim was saying, "He's the
one who assaulted met" The proponent may try to fit
the identification under the excited-utterance exception.
Q.

May a complaint-affidavit submitted during preliminary
investigation be introduced in evidence against
the accused?

A.

No. A complaint-affidavit is hearsay where affiant did
not testify and was not subject to cross-examination
on contents thereof. (/barez v. People, 9 Oct 2019,
Bersamin, C.J.).

O.

A registered owner of a transfer certificate of title
filed with the RTC a petition for replacement of
lost duplicate certificate of title under Section 109
of the Property Registration Decree. The petition
was filed through the registered owner's attorneyin-fact and brother. The attorney-in-fact testified
in court and identified the registered owner's
affidavit of loss. The registered owner himself did
not testify in court. May the petition be granted?

A

No. The affidavit of loss executed by the registered
owner is hearsay. As the registered owner did not
take the witness stand and testify as to the fact of
loss, the loss of the duplicate certificate of title was
not adequately proven. The attorney-in-fact testified
only to identify the affidavit of loss but did not himself
testify of his personal knowledge regarding the loss.
(Republic v. Ciruelas, 17 February 2021, Delos
Santos, J.).

821

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

O

Prosecution for rape. Dr. Mijares examined the
victim AAA and executed a medical report on his
findings. At the scheduled hearing, Dr. Mijares
appeared, after several subpoenas and warnings
from the court, but instead of presenting him to
be examined on his medical report on the alleged
rape of AAA, the prosecutor manifested that she

was dispensing with his testimony provided the
defense agreed to the prosecution's offer of
stipulation that AAA submitted herself to medical
examination one week after the alleged rape, to
which the defense acceded. Is the medical report
hearsay?

A.

Yes, since Dr. Mijares did not testify in court regarding
the same
In fact his testimony was dispensed with.
(People v. Rondina, 30 June 2014), (Note that the
stipulation was not on the authenticity of the medical
report but on the fact simply that AAA submitted
herself to medical examination one week after the
alleged rape).

Q,

Plaintlff sued Defendant for damages arising from
tort. Plaintiff offers in evidence a medical certificate
from Dr. X to the effect that Plaintiff suffered
whiplash. Is the medical certificate admissible in
evidence over objection that it is hearsay?

A,

No. Medical certificate that plaintiff suffered from
whiplash injury is hearsay. (Dela Llana v. Biong, 4
Dec 2013, Brion, J.).

0.

Suit by the heirs of passengers against the ship
company for damages arising from the sinking of
the ship and the consequent loss of life of all the
passengers and the crew, The plaintiffs contend
that the ship company was negligent for allowing
an unseaworthy ship to set sail, The defendant

822

Parl Evidence Rule

ship company presents a witness who will testify
that he saw the captain inspecting the vessel and
then taking his wife and children aboard. Objection
on the ground that the testimony is about hearsay.
Should the objection be sustained?
A.

No, The non-verbal conduct of the captain is not
intended as an assertion, Hence the same is not
hearsay. (FRE 801[a]). The testimony is admissible to
prove that by inference that the vessel was seaworthy.

0.

Prosecution of accused Igor for the murder of
Drago, The prosecution proposes to introduce in
evidence the testimony of WIgo to the effect that
while he was talking on the phone with Drago on
the night of his murder, he heard Drago say, "Igor,
hand me a cigarette, please." The testimony is
offered to prove that Igor was in the room with
Drago on the night Drago was killed. The defense
objects on the ground of hearsay. Rule on the
objection.

A,

The objection should be overruled. Drago's utterance
ls not a statement since it was not assertive. An
assertion is defined as an intended communication of
a fact or belief. Drago did not intend to communicate
any fact or belief to lgor; he was just asking him for a
cigarette. Hence Drago's verbal utterance is not
hearsay and is admissible to prove that lgor was in
the room with him.

•

Explain the second paragraph of S37 R130
concerning prior out-of-court statement of a
declarant who is subject to cross-examination at
the trial concerning the statement.

A.

The second paragraph of S37 R130 provides that
even if the declarant is testifying in court and is subject
to cross on his prior out-of-court statement, such
823

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

statement is still hearsay unless it falls within any of
the exceptions stated therein. This is a departure from

the traditional rule that an out-of-court statement is
not hearsay if the declarant will be presented as a
witness in court and subject to cross-examination
concerning such statement.

S37(a) refers to a prior out-of-court statement
which is inconsistent with the declarant's testimony
and was given under oath subject to the penalty of
perjury at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or in a
deposition. Here the cross-examiner is using the

statement not merely to impeach the witness but to
prove the truth of the matter asserted in the
statement. That is why the statement is required to be
given under oath in order to lend it trustworthiness. If
the cross-examiner is using the statement merely to
impeach the declarant-witness but not as substantive
evidence, there is no need for the prior statement to
be under oath.

The prior consistent statement in S37(b) is being
offered by the party presenting the declarant to rebut

an express or implied charge against the declarant of
recent fabrication or improper influence or motive.

The statement

in S37(c) is one in which the

declaranl Identifies a person as someone the declarant
perceived earlier "

g37ta)(b) and (c) were adopted from FRE 801()(1). Even in the US.,
these provisions, especially (a) and (b) are considered as extremely complex and
perplexing It is submitted that a better rtule which is more easily applied in
litigation is to consider all prior statements of a declaran! as non-hearsay if the
delerant testifies at the trial or hearing and is subject to cross-examination
concerning the statement. This approach is favored by authorities like John
Henry Wigmore, Emund Morgan, and Charles McCormick

824

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

Defense presents DW as witness in which she
testified· that accused was not the one who shot
the victim. On cross, she denies making a contrary
statement to police. Prosecution presents a police
investigator who wilt testify that DW told him that
the accused had shot the victim. ls DW's
statement to the police hearsay?

A.

It depends on the purpose for which the statement is
offered. If offered merely to impeach the testimony of
DW as witness pursuant to S11 R132, it is not
hearsay. The reason is that it is not being offered to
prove the truth of the matter asserted.
If it is offered as substantive evidence, it would
be hearsay. S37(a) R130 requires that the prior
inconsistent statement be given under oath subject to
the penalty of perjury at a trial, hearing, or other
proceeding, or in a deposition. DW's prior inconsistent
statement is not under oath and is thus hearsay. The
statement may not be used by the prosecution to
prove that the accused shot the victim but only to
Impeach DW.

0.

Defense presents DW as witness in which she
testified that accused was not the one who shot
the victim. The prosecution then offers in evidence
the transcript of DW's testimony in a related civil
case wherein DW stated that the accused was the
one who shot the victim. ls DW's testimony in the
civil case hearsay?

A.

No, DW's testimony in the civil case is non-hearsay.
It Is DW's prior inconsistent statement given under
oath subject to perjury at a trial. Hence it can be used
to prove that the accused shot the victim

825

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
0.

W saw a blue car enter the intersection when the
traffic light was red against it and collide with a

white car. W executes an affidavit to this effect.
The plaintiff (driver of the white car) then brings a
suit against the defendant (the driver of the blue
car). The plaintiff presents W as a witness to testify
on what he saw. May the plaintiff introduce In
evidence W's affidavit over a hearsay objection?
A.

No, W's affidavit would be hearsay unless the affidavit

is offered to rebut an express or implied charge
against W of recent fabrication or improper influence
or motive. W's affidavit contains his out-of-court
statement and would amount to impermissible bolstering

of W's testimony. The fact that the affiant W is
presented as a witness in court would not detract from
the fact that W's affidavit is still hearsay.
However, if defendant's counsel on crossexamination of y had insinuated that he had been
paid by the plaintiff to testify, the plaintiff's counsel
may introduce W's affidavit over hearsay objection,

The affidavit would be admissible to rebut the charge
that W had fabricated his testimony because he had
been paid.
Q.

Prosecution of accused for sexual molestation of
X. X testifies that accused sexually molested her and
was cross-examined. The prosecution then offers
the testimony of Y (X's friend) who will testify that
X told her that she had been sexually molested
by the accused, ls Y's testimony hearsay?

A.

Yes. The declarant-witness's prior consistent statement
is hearsay even if she was subject to Crossexamination concerning the statement since it was
not offered to rebut an express or implied charge
against the declarant of recent fabrication or improper
influence or motive.

826

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

A.

The prosecution witness W testified that it was
the accused who punched the victim. On crossexamination, the defense counsel asked W whether
he had previously fought with the accused over a
woman. May the prosecution, over hearsay objection,
present a police investigator to testify that he had
been told by W a few days after the incident that it
was the accused who punched the victim?
Yes. The cross-examiner in asking whether the witness

W had previously fought with the accused over a
woman was making an implied charge of improper
motive against the witness. Hence, the W's previous

consistent statement Is not hearsay under S37(b) R130
if offered to rebut the charge of improper motive.
Q.

W witnessed a shooting. In the police station, W

identifies X as the gunman from a rogues' gallery.
The prosecution presents W as a witness and he
identifies in court X as the gunman. May the
prosecution present a police officer to testify regarding
W's identification of X in the rogue's gallery?

A.

Yes. A statement in which the declarant identifies a
person as someone the declarant perceived earlier is
not hearsay if the declarant testifies at the trial and is
subject to cross-examination concerning the statement.
Here, W's statement is one which identifies a person
as someone the declarant (W) perceived earlier, Of
course, if W had not been presented in court, the
police officer's testimony on the identification would
be hearsay.

Q.

What are the reasons for excluding hearsay?

A.

The reasons for excluding hearsay are the following;
(COD)

827

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(a) The lack of opportunity on the part of the party
against which It is offered to cross-examine the
declarant, that is, the person who made the
statement.

(b) The statement or declaration is not made under

path.
(c) The court does not have the opportunity to
observe the demeanor of the declarant. (Estrada
• Desierto, G.R. Nos. 146710-15, 3 April 2001)
•

What are self-serving statements? What ls
the proper ground for objecting to self-serving
statements ?

A

Self-serving statements are those made by a party
out of court advocating his own interest. They do not
include a party's testimony in court as a witness. The
proper ground for objecting to self-serving statements

is not that they are self-serving but that they are
hearsay. Statements made by a party in court favoring
his interest may not be objected to as self-serving
since the party may be cross-examined. (People v.

Omictin, 26 July 2010)
Q.

What is an independently relevant statement?

A

An out-of-court statement which is relevant not for the
truth of a fact asserted therein but for something else,
e.g., state of mind, intent, belief, the mere fact of
utterance, or legal effect (SIBUL). Otherwise put, the
statement is relevant regardless of its truth. Not being

hearsay, an independently relevant evidence is
admissible.

828

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

In a petition for the allowance of the will of
deceased Bent, an oppositor presents the testimony
of X to the effect that he had heard Bent declare
that there were Martians in his backyard. ls Bent's
declaration hearsay?

A.

No. It is an independently relevant statement. The
statement is offered to prove not that Martians exist
but that Bent was not of sound and disposing mind.
Another approach is to say that X has personal
knowledge of Bent's declaration although he has no
personal knowledge of the fact that there were
Martians in Bent's backyard. But what is sought to
be proved is the declaration itself, not the presence
of Martians.

Q.

A overheard 8 call X a thief. In an action for
defamation filed by X against B, Is the testimony
of A offered to prove the fact of utterance, i.e.,
that B called X a thief, admissible in evidence?

(99 Bar Q17 c ).
A,

The testimony of A is admissible in evidence.
The Supreme Court has held that a statement is
not hearsay if it is offered not to prove the truth of the
matter asserted therein, but the mere fact of utterance.
Here the statement of B that X is a thief is not
relevant for its truth but for the fact that it was uttered
and that X was defamed. It is an independently
relevant statement and hence admissible.
Note: Another approach Is to treat B's statement
as non-hearsay since it is an admission by a partyopponent. (FRE 801 [dl[2]]). The rationale for this is
that the party against whom the statement is offered
cannot claim that he has a right to cross-examine

himself.
829

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

X was charged with robbery. On the strength of a
warrant of arrest issued by the court, X was
arrested by police operatives. They seized from
his person a handgun. A charge for illegal
possession of firearms was also filed against him.
In a press conference called by the police, X
admitted that he had robbed the victim of jewelry
valued at P500,000.00.
The robbery and illegal possession of firearm
cases were tried jointly. The prosecution presented
in evidence a newspaper clipping of the report by
the reporter who was present during the press
conference stating that X admitted the robbery.
xxx. [The offer in evidence of the newspaper
clipping] was objected to by the defense.

(a)

ls the newspaper clipping
evidence against X?

admissible

in

(b) xx(03 Bar 018).

A.

(a) The newspaper clipping is not admissible in evidence
against X.

Under

the

Rules

of Evidence,

hearsay is

inadmissible in evidence unless it falls within any of

the exceptions.

Here the newspaper clipping of the report is
hearsay since the reporter who wrote the news account
was not presented in court and hence could not be
cross-examined by the accused as to the accuracy or
veracity of his report. Newspaper articles are hearsay
(State Prosecutors v. Muro, 251 SCRA 111 [1993];
Feria v. Court of Appeals, G.R. No. 122954, 15
February 2000) even though the statements reported
therein are party-admissions. (Wright v. Montgomery

830

Paro! Evidence Rule

County, Civil Action No. 96-4597, U.S. District Court
for Eastern Pennsylvania, Memorandum and Order
dated 20 May 2002)

Note: There are two out-of-court statements (or
declarants) involved here, that of the accused admitting
the robbery and that of the reporter reporting the
accused's admission, While the accused's statement
is admissible as an admission, that of the reporter is
hearsay not falling within any exception, Suggested
answers which hold the newspaper clipping admissible
as an admission interest overlooked the other declarant,
i.e., the reporter.
Suggested answer of the U.P. Law Center
Yes, the newspaper cllpping is admissible in
evidence against X. Regardless of the truth or falsity
of the statement, the hearsay rule does not apply and
the statement may be shown where the fact that It is
made is relevant. Evidence as to the making of such
statement is not secondary but primary, for the
statement itself may constitute a fact in issue or be
circumstantially relevant as to the existence of such
fact. (Gotesco Investment Corporation v. Chatt0, 210
SCRA 18 {1992)).

Comment: In the robbery case, the fact in issue
is whether X had robbed the victim. The statement
that X admitted robbing the victim is relevant only if
offered to prove its truth. Otherwise it has no independent
probative value. This should be distinguished from a
situation where the fact that a statement was made,
regardless of its truth or falsity, has relevance, as for
instance In a libel case where the defendant's
statement calling the plaintiff a swindler is relevant to
the issue of whether the defendant libeled the plaintiff,
even if the statement is untrue.

831

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Hence the statement is not independently relevant
and should be excluded as hearsay not falling within

any exception.
Q.

Is an online article or blog article offered to prove
the truth of the matter asserted therein hearsay?

A.

Yes. (See Reyes • Comelec, G.R. No, 207264, 25
June 2013, Brion, J., dissenting). The reason is that
the declarant or author is not presented In court for

cross-examination by the adverse party.
Q.

P sues D for recovery of title and possesslon of

land and for the demolition of the improvements
constructed therein. D in his answer alleged that
his father from whom he inherited the property is
the owner of the land and assuming that his father
did not own the land, his father was a possessor
in good faith and thus D has a right of retention.
a)

D offers the testimony of X to prove that his
X will testify that he
heard D's father say to a government surveyor
while in possession of the land that he was its
owner. Is X's testimony admissible over relevant
objection?
father owned the land.

b) Will your answer be the same if the testimony
of X is offered to prove that D's father was a
possessor-in-good faith?
A.

a)

X's testimony is not admissible over an objection

that It was hearsay.
X's testimony is about the out-of-court declaration of
D's father and is offered to prove the truth of the
matter asserted therein, that D's father was the owner
of the land. Hence the same is hearsay and
inadmissible

832

Paro! Evidence Rule

b) My answer would not be the same.

The declaration of D's father is an independently
relevant statement since it was not offered to prove
that D's father was the owner of the land but that he
believed that he was the owner of the land and thus a
possessor in good faith. Otherwise put the statement
is relevant not for its truth but to show that D's father
believed in good faith that he was the owner although
he actually was not.
Q.

A sold a parcel of registered land to B. The deed
of sale was notarized but was not registered with
the register of deeds. A later sold the same parcel
of land to C. This time the deed of sale was
registered. B filed an action for annulment of the
sale against C. B offers the testimony of W to the
effect that he (W) had heard A say to C prior to the
sale to the latter the following: "I sold the land to
B but don't worry, the sale was not registered." C
objects to the testimony on the ground that A's
statement was hearsay. How should the court rule
on the objection?

A,

The court should overrule the objection. A's statement
is admissible as an independently relevant statement,
Statements of a person from which an inference may
be made as to the state of mind of another person,
i.e., the knowledge, belief, good or bad faith, motive,
etc. of the latter are independently relevant.
Here A's statement is admissible to prove the
bad faith of C, that is, he was aware of or at least had
notice of the earlier sale to B. Hence the same is
independently relevant and admissible in evidence. (5
MANUEL V. MORAN, COMMENTS ON THE RULES
OF COURT 289 [1980 ed.))

833

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
Q.

In Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April
2001, at issue was whether President Estrada resigned
from his position. Submitted to prove Estrada's
intent to resign was the Angara Diary in which
Executive Secretary Edgardo Angara recorded
Estrada's statements in which he said,"Pagod na
pagod na ako. Ayoko na, masyado nang masakit.

Pagod na ako sa red tape, bureaucracy, intriga. I
just want to clear my name, then I will go."
Angara himself did not testify in court. Estrada's
lawyers argued that these statements were hearsay.
Were they?
A.

No The statements are independently relevant, that
Is, relevant independently of whether they are true or
not. Independently relevant statements are of two
classes: (1) those statements which are the very facts
in issue, and (2) those statements which are
circumstantial evidence of the facts in issue. The second
class includes statements of a person showing his
state of mind (i.e., his mental condition, knowledge,
belief, intention, ill will, and other emotions) and
statements of a person from which an inference may
be made as to the state of mind of another 1 The
Angara Diary contains statements of Erap which
reflect his state of mind and are circumstantial evidence
of his intent to resign, It also contains statements of
Secretary Angara from which one can reasonably
infer Erap's intent to resign. Such statements are
independently relevant and are excluded from the
hearsay rule.

re Supreme Court's use of this exception (statemonts of a person

fror which an inference ray be made as to the state of mind of another) in effect

aopts the controversial doctrine laid down by the U.S. Supreme Court an Mutual
Life insurance Co v, Hi\on, 145 U,$. 285 (1892) wherein s person's out-ofcurt statements were used to prove not only his Intention but the intention of
another person as w!l The Hilimon doctrine should however be applied to the
special facts ir the case but should not be used as a carte blanchs for the
holding that the declarant's statement may refer to the state of min of another
person and not the dectarant himself.

834

Paro! Evidence Rule

Note: The diary itself was hearsay, since the
diarist Angara was not presented in court. It however
contains statements of the declarant Angara which

are independently relevant.
Another approach (requiring less detailed
analysis) with respect to Erap's declarations, are that
the same are admissions of a party-opponent and
hence not hearsay pursuant to FRE 801(d)(2). In
respect of Angara's statements in the diary, the same
are also not hearsay since they are vicarious admissions
imputable to Erap, Angara being the executive secretary
of Erap and thus his agent.
Q.

Wife and Rolando prosecuted for parricide for
allegedly hiring a bomb-maker who planted a bomb
in the husband's car. The Prosecution presented
witness W who will testify that he overheard a
conversation between Rolando and the wife that
they would fetch a man in Bulacan who knew how
to place a bomb in a vehicle. Wife and Rolando
objected to the testimony for being hearsay.
Should the objection be sustained?

A.

The hearsay rule states that a witness may not testify
as to what he merely learned from others either
because he was told, or he read or heard the same.
The law however provides for specific exceptions to
the hearsay rule. One is the doctrine of independently
relevant statements, where only the fact that such
statements were made is relevant, and the truth or
falsity thereof is immateriat.
The hearsay rule does
not apply; hence, the statements are admissible as
evidence. Evidence as to the making of such statement

me As previously discussed, independently relevant statements are not
exceptions to the hearsay rule but are simply non-hearsay.lt is more precise to
say that independently relevant statements are not covered by the hearsay rule

835

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
is not secondary but primary, for the statement itself

may constitute a fact in issue or be circumstantially
relevant as to the existence of such a fact. The
witness who testifies thereto is competent because he

heard the same, as this is a matter of fact derived
from his own perception, and the purpose Is to
prove either that the statement was made or the
tenor thereof.

In this case, W's testimony that he overhead a
conversation between Rolando and the wife that they
would fetch a man in Bulacan who knew how to place
a bomb in a vehicle is admissible, if only to establish
the fact that such statement was made an the tenor
thereof. (People v. Malibiran, G.R. No, 178301, 24
April 2009).
Note: Another approach is to treat the statements
of Rolando and the wife as party-admissions, and
hence not hearsay.
Q.

Prosecution for murder of X for shooting to death
Z, the lover of X's mother Y. The shooting occurred
in Y's house. X and Y contend that Z had barged
into Y's house uninvited and had tried to shoot Y,
forcing X to shoot Z in defense of his mother. The
prosecution will present W, Z's son, to testify that
he heard his father say that he was going to Y's
house as he was summoned by Y, The defense
objects that W will be testifying as to hearsay.
Should the objection be sustained?

A.

No. The statement of Z that he was going to Y's
house as he was summoned by Y is independently
relevant for it shows Z's intent to go to Y's house and
is thus circumstantial evidence that Z did go to Y's
house upon the latter's summons. The statement thus
disproves X and Y's contention that Z barged into Y's
836

Parol Evidence Rule

house uninvited. (See Estrada v. Desierto, G.R.
146710-15, 3 April 2001, Mutual Life Insurance Co. v.
Himon, 145 U.S. 285 [1892]).
0.

Prosecution of Magwitch and Compeyson, members
of Dura Lex Pyrex Fraternity, for the death due to
hazing of Pip. Magwitch and Compeyson deny
that they and Dura Lex Pyrex had anything to do
with Pip's demise. The prosecution offers the
testimony of Estella, Pip's girlfriend, who will
testify that hours before the death of Pip, he (Pip)
had called her and said that he was going to the
initiation rites of Dura Lex Pyrex. The defense
objects on the ground of hearsay, How should the
court rule on the objection?

A.

The court should overrule the objection. The statement
of Pip that he was going to the initiation rites shows
Pip's state of mind or intent and is independently
relevant as circumstantial evidence that Pip did go to
the initiation rites. (See Estrada v. Desierto, G.R.
146710-15, 3 April 2001; Mutual Life Insurance Co. v.
Hillmon, 145 U.S. 285 [18921).

Q.

Prosecution of M's son S for the murder of L, the
lover of M. The version of M and S is that L, without
any prior notice, had in a fit of jealous rage
barged into the house of M and had threatened to
klll her, forcing S to shoot L. The prosecution
presents as its witness D, the daughter of L. D
will testify that on the day of the shooting, her
father before leaving their house had told her that
he was invited by M to her house because NM
wanted to reconcile with L. The defense objects
to O's testimony on what L said on the ground of
hearsay. Should the objection be sustained?

837

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

No, The statement of L that he was going to M's
house upon her invitation shows L's state of mind or
intent and is independently relevant as circumstantial
evidence that L did not barge into M's house but was

inveigled by her with the promise of reconciliation,
(See Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. 146710-15, 3 April
2001; Mutual Life Insurance Co. v. Hillmon, 145 U.S.

285 [18921)
Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the
qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11, 2009
a text message, which Mabini's estranged wife
Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of his
death, reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u ni Mabini. Mtgal n

nyang plano i2. Mg ingat u bka ma tsugi k."
a)

xx¥

b)

xxx

c)

If Mabini's objection in question B was
overruled, can he object to the presentation of

the text message on the ground that it was
hearsay?
d)

A.

xxx (10 Bar Q1).

c) If Mabini's objection in question B was overruled,
he cannot object to the presentation of the text
message on the ground that it was hearsay
The Supreme Court has held that statements
showing the declarant's state of mind, such as his
knowledge or belief, are considered as independently
relevant statements and thus not hearsay. (Estrada v
Desierto, GR. 146710-15, 3 April 2001)

838

Paro Evidence Rule

Here the text message showed Gregoria's knowledge
or belief that Mabini planned to kill Emilio. Hence the
same is not hearsay and is admissible in evidence.
0.

S was arrested by security forces in Malaya
during a jungle counter-terrorist operation. At the
time of his arrest, he was found wounded and
with an ammunition belt on his waist. He was
charged with unlawful possession of ammunition.
He pleaded duress as defense, saying that he was
captured by terrorists and forced to go with them.
His testimony regarding what the terrorists said to
him, that is, that he was going to be taken to the
terrorist lair, was excluded as hearsay by the trial
judge. Was this exclusion correct?

A.

No, the statements were independently relevant. The
statements made by the terrorists, quite apart from
their truth, created a reasonable apprehension in the
defendant of instant death if he did not conform to
their wishes and supported his claim of duress.
(Subramaniam v. Public Prosecutor, 1 W.LR. 965
[Privy Council 1956])

Q.

H insured his life with X Insurance Co, and
designated W as the beneficiary. The policy
provided that the beneficiary could be changed by
a written notice designating the new beneficiary
sent by the insured and received by X Insurance
Co. before the death of the insured. After the
death of H, Q demanded from X Insurance Co. the
proceeds of the policy, claiming that she had
been designated as the beneficiary by H as may
be seen from a copy of a written notice signed by
H and allegedly received by X Insurance Co,
before H's death.

839

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

Q sues X Insurance Co. for its refusal to
deliver the proceeds of the policy to her. X

Insurance Co. raises the defense that it did not,
before H's death, receive from H the required written

notice changing the beneficiary from W to Q. At
the trial, Q did not produce the copy of the written
notice supposedly received by X Insurance Co.
Instead, Q merely presented R who testified that
shortly before H's death, H had instructed R to
write to X Insurance Co. to that effect.
R's testimony was objected to on the grounds
that it was hearsay. Rule on the objection.
A.

The objection that R's testimony was hearsay should
be overruled

Under the Law on Evidence, an independently
relevant statement is not covered by the hearsay rule.
An independently relevant statement is one which is
relevant not for its truth, but for something else, such
as the declarant's state of mind.
Here R's testimony on H's instruction to him is
relevant to show H's state of mind or intent, that is, his
intent to change the beneficiary in the policy.
Q.

Maximo filed an action against Pedro, the
administrator of the estate of the deceased Juan,
for the recovery of a car which is part of the
latter's estate. During the trial, Maximo presented
witness Mariano who testified that he was present
when Maximo and Juan agreed that the latter would
pay a rental of P20,000 for the use of Maximo's
car for one month after which Juan should
immediately return the car to Maximo. Pedro
objected to the admission of Marlano's testimony
ypothetical is based on Question 9a of the 1978 PRemed at t.aw Bar Exam

840

Parol Evidence Rule

on the ground of hearsay. If you were the judge,
would you sustain Pedro's objection? Why? (01
Bar Q1704)."
A.

If I were the Judge, I would overrule Pedro's objection.
Under the Law on Evidence, out-of-court
statements which are relevant for their legal effect or
significance are independently relevant statements
and are thus admissible since they are not covered by
the hearsay rule. Examples are out-of-court statements
that constitute or are relevant to the making of a
contract; these are relevant not for their truth per se
but for their legal effect or significance, i.e., the making
or perfection of a contract. The out-of-court statements
constituting the contract will no more be hearsay than
the printed statements of a written contract.
(RICHARD LEMPERT & STEPHEN SALTZBURG, A
MODERN APPROACH TO EVIDENCE 359 [2d ed.
1982, 3d reprint 1988])

Here Juan's statement is relevant for its legal
effect, that is, that a contract of lease was entered into
between him and Maximo. Hence the objection
should be overruled.
Q.

A foreign dog trained to sniff dangerous drugs
from packages, was hired by FDP Corporation, a
door to door forwarder company, to sniff packages
in their depot at the international airport. In one of
the routinary inspections of packages waiting to
be sent to the United States of America (USA), the
dog sat beside one of the packages, a signal that
the package contained dangerous drugs. Thereafter,
the guards opened the package and found two (2)
kilograms of cocaine. The owner of the package
was arrested and charges were filed against him.

rte bar question was modified by the author by adding hearsay as the
ground for objection.

841

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

During the trial, the prosecution, through the
trainer who was present during the incident and
an expert in this kind of field, testified that the dog
was highly trained to sniff packages to determine
if the contents were dangerous drugs and the
sniffing technique of these highly trained dogs
was accepted worldwide and had been successful
in dangerous drugs operations. The prosecution

moved to admit this evidence to Justify the
opening of the package. The accused objected on
the grounds that: (i) the guards had no personal
knowledge of the contents of the package before
it was opened; (Ii) the testimony of the trainer of
the dog is hearsay; and (iii) the accused could not
cross-examine the dog. Decide. (2014 Bar Q13).

A.

Objections overruled.
Tho objection that the guards had no personal
knowledge of the contents of the package before it
was opened is misplaced, The one testifying is the
trainer not the guards and he had personal knowledge
of the circumstances since he was present during the
incident. The trainer was testifying as to the contents
of the package after it was opened and not before.
Besides there is no rule of evidence that one cannot
testify about the contents of a package if he did not
have prior personal knowledge of its contents before
opening It.
The objection that the testimony of the trainer of
the dog is hearsay is not valid. Hearsay is an out-ofcourt declaration made by a person which is offered
for the truth of the matter asserted. (See FRE 801).
Here what is involved is a dog who is not a
person who can make an out-of-court declaration.
(Lempent & Saltzburg, A MODERN APPROACH TO
EVIDENCE 370-371 [1982)). A dog is not treated as

842

Paro! Evidence Rule

a declarant or witness who can be cross-examined.
(People v. Centolella, 305 N.Y.S.2d 279 [1969]).
Hence testimony that the dog sat beside the package
is not testimony about an out-of-court declaration and
is thus not hearsay.
The objection that the accused could not crossexamine the dog is without merit. Under the Constitution,
the accused's right of confrontation refers to witnesses.
As previously discussed, a dog is not a witness who
can be cross-examined.
Q.

Is hearsay admissible if not objected to?

A.

Yes. Hearsay if not objected to may be admitted and
considered as sufficient to prove the facts therein
asserted. (Tison v. CA, 276 SCRA 582). Hearsay
alone may be insufficient to establish a fact but when
no objection is made thereto it is, like any other
evidence, to be considered and given the importance
It deserves. (Manliclic v. Calaunan, G.RR. 150157, 25
January 2007). Because of a party's failure to timely
object, the evidence becomes part of the evidence in
the case. Thereafter, all the parties are considered
bound by any outcome arising from the offer of evidence
properly presented. (Advance Paper Corp. v. Arma
Traders Corp., 11 Dec 2013). In Advance Paper
Corp., the SC took into consideration sales invoices,
despite the proponent's failure to present in court the
secretaries who had prepared them, because the
adverse party had failed to timely object to the offer of
the sales invoices on the ground of hearsay.
In a criminal case, however, hearsay even if not
objected to should not be accorded any probative
value against the accused because it would violate
his constitutional right of confrontation. (People v.
Melosantos, 245 SCRA 569, 576 [1995]. See People
v. Mamalias, 328 SCRA 760, 772-773 [2000]).
843

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
•

What are the exceptions to the hearsay rule?

A

Exceptions may be grouped into two: those where
there is a requirement that the declarant is dead or
unable/unavailable to testify (DU requirement) and
those where there is no such requirement.
Unavailability of the declarant means that the
declarant cannot be produced in court by a party
despite diligent efforts, as when he could no longer be
located. Mere refusal to testify is not equivalent to
unavailability as declarant can be subpoenaed, unless
declarant is invoking a constitutional privilege.

Exceptions where there is a DU requirement:
(3D PF)
1)

Dying declaration

2)

Declaration against interest

3)

Statement of decedent or person of unsound mind.

4)

Act of declaration about pedigree.

5)

Former testimony or deposition.

Exceptions where there is no OU requirement:
(RFC BLOC)

1)

Res gestae.

2)

Family reputation.

3)

Cammon reputation.

4) Business records.
5)

Learned treatises.

6) Official records.
7)

Commercial publications.

844

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

Are the exceptions to the hearsay rule admissible
because they are not hearsay?

A.,

No. The exceptions to the hearsay rule are still
hearsay. Nonetheless by reasons of trustworthiness
or necessit, they are admissible in evidence.

Q.

Would the admisslon of hearsay exceptions against
an accused violate his constitutional right to
confront the witnesses against him?

A.

No, Philippine evidentiary law and jurisprudence have
long recognized the admissibility of hearsay exceptions
against an accused. For instance, dying declarations
are routinely admitted in criminat cases for murder or
homicide against the accused. The Supreme Court
has stated that the dying declarant is not regarded as
a witness whom the accused is entitled to meet face
to face. The Court stated that the Bill of Rights
guarantee to an accused of the confrontation right
was adopted against tho already existing hearsay rule
and thus subject to the rule's well-established
exceptions. (United States • De la Cruz, 12 Phil. 87
[1908]) Thus testimony by a police officer on a
declarant's statement implicating an accused was
admitted as an excited utterance even if there was no
satisfactory showing that the declarant was unavailable
to testify.""
In the United States, a similar approach was
taken until the promulgation of the landmark case
of Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), which
circumscribed this approach. The U.S. Supreme Court
ruled that an out-of-court "testimonial" statement by a

"people v. Ner, 28 SCRA 1151 (1969) Admittedly, the pronouncement
was obiter considering that there were otter pieces of evidence against the
accused, Se ANTONIO RR. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 214-215 (2004 ed )
see Ohio v. Roberts, 448 0.$. 56 (1984)

845

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

non-testifying witness (in this case offered as a
declaration against penal interest) may not be
admitted against the accused where there was no snowing
that the declarant was unable to testify and that the
accused had the prior opportunity to cross-examine
the declarant. The court held that admitting such statement
would violate the accused's confrontation right."

Dying declaration
Q.

Give the requirements for a dying declaration to
be admissible as an exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

The requirements for a dying declaration are the
following: (DICC)
a) The declaranl is dead,
b) His death is tho subject of inquiry in the case.
c) The declaration was made under the consciousness
of an impending death.
d) The declaration Is about the cause and surrounding
circumstances of his death. (S38 R130).

Q.

The accused was charged with robbery and
homicide. The victim suffered several stab wounds.
It appears that eleven hours after the crime, while
the victim was being brought to the hospital in a
jeep, with his brother and a policeman as
companions, the victim was asked certain questions
which he answered, pointing to the accused as
his assailant. His answers were put down in
writing, but since he was in a critical condition,

see Gary AM. Bishop, Tostionia Statemems, Excited Utterances and

tho Confrontation Clause Formulating a Precise Pule afer Crawford and Davis,
54 Cle St. L. Rev 559 (2008). The Crawford decision defines testimony" as

a

solemn declaration or affirmation made for the purpose of estabilshtrg or proving
some ac." See also Ohio v. Clark, 576 U$._(2015)

846

Parol Evidence Rule

his brother and the policeman signed the statement.
ls the statement admissible as a dying declaration?
(99 Bar Q17ad).

A.

The statement Is admissible as a dying dectaration.
Under the Rules of Evidence, a declaration of a

dying person, mace under consciousness of an
impending death is admissible as an exception to the
hearsay rule. The Supreme Court has held that the
declarant's consciousness of his impending death
may be shown by the nature and gravity of his wounds.
Here the victim suffered several stab wounds
and thus it may be inferred that he had consciousness
of his impending death. The fact that the statement
was not signed is immaterial as there is no
requirement that a dying declaration be put down in
writing and if so that it be signed by the declarant.

0.

While sleeping under a tree, Kintanar was stabbed
several times by a man, sustaining multiple stab
wounds on his chest with blood spurting therefrom.
Bathed in his own blood, Kintanar rushed to his
house where he was met by his wife. Kintanar
informed his wife that it was Gonzales who stabbed
him. On the way to the hospital, Kintanar kept on
saying that it was Gonzales who stabbed him. He
died while undergoing surgery at the hospital.
Convicted for the killing of Kintanar,
Gonzales questioned the admission in evidence
of the ante-mortem statement of Kintanar to his
wife. He argued that from the abovecited facts,
there is no indication that the aforesaid statement
was made by the victim under consciousness of
an impending death. Can the subject statement be
considered as a dying declaration? Why? (93 Bar
020).
847

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME I
A.

Yes the statement may be considered as a dying
declaration.
The Supreme Court has held the declarant's
consciousness of his impending death may be shown
by the nature and gravity of his wounds.
Hore the victim suffered several stab wounds on

his chest with blood spurting therefrom and he was
bathed in his own blood. It may thus be inferred that
he had consciousness of his impending death.

0.

Two days before the victim of a stabbing incident
died, he made a statement to the police identifying

the person who had stabbed him. When asked by
the police, the victim added that he did not know
If the was going to survive because the many stab
wounds he sustained were very painful. ls the
identification by the deceased of his assailant
admissible in evidence as an ante-mortem
statement as an exception to the hearsay rule?
(87 Bar 08)
A.

Yes, the deceased's identification of his assailant is
admissible in evidence as an ante-mortem statement
and an exception to the hearsay rule.
The deceased had consciousness of his impending
death as he stated that he did not know if he was
going to survive because of the many painful stab
wounds he suffered and from which stab wounds he
died two days later. (People v. Sarabia, 127 SCRA 100).

Q.

On March 12, 2008, Mabini was charged with
Murder for fatally stabbing Emilio. To prove the

qualifying circumstance of evident premeditation,
the prosecution introduced on December 11, 2009
a text message, which Mabini's estranged wife

848

Parol Evidence Rule

Gregoria had sent to Emilio on the eve of his death,
reading: "Honey, pa2tayin u nl Mabinl. Mtgal n
nyang plano i2. Mg ingat u bka ma tsugi k."
a)

xxX

b)

xxx

c)

xxx

d)

Suppose that shortly before he expired,
Emilio was able to send a text message to his
wife Graciana reading "Nasaksak ako. D na
me makahinga, Si Mabinl ang may gawa ni2"
ls this text message admissible as a dying
declaration? Explain, (10 Bar Q1).

A.

Yes the text message is admissible as a dying
declaration. The text message was made by Emilio
under consciousness of an impending death. This is
shown by his statement that he could no longer
breathe. It also related to the cause of his death, that
is, his stabbing by Mabini.

Q.

At A's trial for B's murder, the defense attempts to
present as its witness B's widow, X. She is to
testify that just before B died, she approached his
sprawled and bloodied husband and asked who
stabbed him. B, conscious of his impending death,
named Y as his assailant. The prosecution moves
to stop X from testifying because her testimony
(1)is hearsay, and (2) will be violative of the rule
on privileged marital communication. Rule on the
prosecution's motion. Explain. (96 Bar Q15-1).

A.

Prosecution's motion to stop X from testifying ls
denied.

849

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

While X's testimony on what B said is indeed
hearsay, it is however a dying declaration which is an
exception to the hearsay rule. B's declaration related

to the circumstances of his death and he was conscious
of his impending death. Being excepted from the
hearsay rule, B's dying declaration is admissible in
evidence. (S37 R130)
X's testimony on what B had told her is not
covered by the rule on privileged marital communication.
Such rule cannot be invoked if the communication
was not intended to be kept in confidence as in the
case of a dying declaration wherein the declarant's
purpose is to identify his assailant. (U.S. v. Antipolo,
37 Phil, 726).
Q.

Jose was shot and mortally wounded, Before he
expired, he declared thus; "Juan said it was Pedro
who shot me." Would such declaration be admissible
as a dying declaration?

A.

No, since the declarant must be otherwise competent.
Here the declaration of Jose is clearly hearsay.

Q.

A group of three persons, A, B, and C, robbed a
house in a barrio. When they were fleeing after the
robbery, they were intercepted by the police.
Shots were fired, and A was mortally wounded.
Before he passed away, but conscious of his
impending death, he admitted his participation in
the robbery, and named B and C as his
companions, Was the statement of A ante mortem
and entitled to weight as such? Explain. (80
Bar 012).

A.

No, the statement of A was not ante mortem and
entitled to weight as such.

850

Parol Evidence Rule

A requirement for the admissibility of an ante
mortem statement or a dying declaration is that the
declaration is about the cause and surrounding
circumstances of the declarant's death
Here A's statement is not about the cause and
surrounding circumstances of his death but of who his
companions were during the robbery. Hence A's statement
is hearsay and not admissible as a dying declaration,
Not being admissible it is not entitled to any weight.Q.

Accused stabbed the victim twice in the chest.
The victim went home and told his brother, under
labored breathing, that it was the Accused who
stabbed him. The victim was brought to the hospital,
where he was given medical care. However he
expired seven days later from the wounds he
sustained. May the brother's testimony regarding
the victim's statement to him be admitted In
evidence over a hearsay objection?

A

Yes. The victim, after being stabbed by appellant
twice on the chest, went home and under labored
breathing, told his brother that it was the Accused
who had stabbed him. Clearly, the statement made
was an expression of the cause and the surrounding
circumstances of his death, and under the
consciousness of impending death. It is of no moment

that the victim died seven days from the stabbing
incident and after receiving adequate care and treatment,
because the apparent proximate cause of his death,
the punctures In his lungs, was a consequence of
Accused's stabbing him in the chest. (People v.
Rarugal, 16 January 2013, Leonardo-De Castro, J.).

re reader is invited to resolve the l$sues of whether A's statement ls
admissible as (a) a vicarious adrission of a co-conspirator ,(b) as part of the res
gestae or (c) as a dederatior against interest,

851

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Statement of decedent or person of unsound mind
Q.

Discuss the hearsay exception regarding statement
of decedent or person of unsound mind,

A.

In an action" against an executor or administrator or
other representative of a deceased person, or against
a person of unsound mind, upon a claim or demand
against the estate of such deceased person or
against such person of unsound mind, where a party
or assignor of a party or a person in whose behalf a
case is prosecuted testifies on a matter of fact
occurring before the death of the deceased person or
before the person became of unsound mind, any
statement of the deceased or the person of unsound
mind, may be received in evidence If the statement
was made upon the personal knowledge of the
deceased or the person of unsound mind at a time
when the matter had been recently perceived by him
and while his recollection was clear. Such statement,
however, is inadmissible if made under circumstances
indicating ts lack of trustworthiness. (S39 R130).
This is a new hearsay exception laid down in the
2020 Rules on Evidence. The framers decided to
abolish the Dead Man's Statute and to allow the
claimant to testify on an antemortem fact. In order
however to minimize the danger of injustice to the
decedent's estate, the framers decided to provide for
a hearsay exception regarding the decedent's
statements."

"gthough the provision uses the word "action it should be read as
covering not only an action against the executor or administrator under RB7 but
also the fing of a money claim against the estate of a decedent under RB6 This
can be gieared from the phrase "upon a claim r demand against the estate of

such deceased person."

gee Committee Notes on the 2020 Amendments to the Rules on
Evidence

852

Paro! Evidance Rule

Q.

Pedro filed an action to recover property against
the administrator of the estate of Dinggoy.

a) In such action, may Pedro testify that Dinggoy
had encroached on his property and taken
possession without his consent?
b) In the action filed by Pedro against the
administrator, may the administrator present
a witness who will testify that Dinggoy had
told him that Pedro had a week earlier sold
the property to Dinggoy, over objection that
such testimony is about hearsay ?
A.

a) Yes. The Dead Man's Rule under the former S23
R130 was deleted under the 2020 Rules on Evidence.
Hence Pedro may testify on an ante-mortem fact.
b)

Yes. The statement of Dinggoy is not hearsay
since Pedro had testified on an ante-mortem fact.
Hence the statement of of the deceased Dinggoy
may be received in evidence since the matter had
been recently perceived by him and his recollection
was clear. There was no showing that Dinggoy's
statement lacked trustworthiness.

Q.

Vivo filed with the probate court a money claim
against the estate of Dedo. The money claim is
supported by a promissory note executed by
Dedo in favor of Vivo. The administrator of Dedo's
estate offers the testimony of Testigo who will
testify that Dedo told him that he (Dedo) had fully
paid the promissory note. ls Dedo's ante·mortem
statement hearsay?

A.

Yes. The hearsay exception under S39 R130 will come
into play only if the claimant will testify on an antemortem fact. Here Vivo merely presented the promissory
note but did not testify on any ante-mortem fact. Hence
Testigo's testimony relates to hearsay.
853

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the hearsay exception regarding records
of regularly conducted business activity?

A.

A memorandum, report, record or data compilation of
acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, made
by writing, typing, electronic, optical or other similar
means at or near the time of or from transmission or
supply of information by a person with knowledge
thereof, and kept in the regular course or conduct of a
business activity, and such was the regular practice to
make the memorandum, report, record, or data
compilation by electronic, optical or similar means, all
of which are shown by the testimony of the custodian
or other qualified witnesses, is excepted from the rule
on hearsay evidence. (S45 R130, as amended by the
2020 Rules on Evidence).

Q.

Discuss the changes brought about by the new
provision on hearsay exception regarding records
of a regularly conducted business activity.

A,

The new provision provides for a uniform rule regarding
business records. Before there was a bifurcated
approach regarding business records: S43 R130 for
non-electronic business records and R8 of the Rules
on Electronic Evidence (REE) on electronic business
records." The new S45 R130 provides for a uniform
approach since S45 R130 applies to both electronic

and non-electronic business records. This can be
seen from the phrase "made by writing, typing,
electronic, optical or other similar means."" Thus the
former provision on business entries was deleted from
the new Rules on Evidence. In effect the 2020 Rules
on Evidence adopted the rule in R8 REE

gg REE was based on FRE 803(6)
My/tile $46 RR30 states in another part that "such was the reguar
practice to make the memorandum, report, record, or data compilation by
electronic, optical or slrMar means, it s evident that the omission of "writing.
yping" in tis part of the provision was simply a orattng oversight

854

Parol Evidence Rule

A significant change or innovation under S45
R130 is that the availability or unavailability of the
entrant is no longer material. Under the former S43
R130 on business entries, it was required that the
entrant be dead or unavailable to testify.
Furthermore, the entrant need no longer have
personal knowledge of the information he is
recording, it being sufficient that the record is made
by or from transmission or supply of information by a
person with knowledge thereof, Under the former S43
R130, it was required that the entrant "was in a
position to know the fact therein stated."
Business records are no longer considered as
prima facie evidence. Under the former S43 R130,
business entries were received as prima facie evidence.

Q.

What are the conditions for the admission of a
business record as an exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

1)

There is a memorandum, report, record or data
compilation of acts, events, conditions, opinions,
or diagnoses, made by writing, typing, electronic,
optical or other similar means

2) The memorandum etc. is made at or near the time
of the act, event, etc.

3) The memorandum etc, is made by, or from
transmission or supply of information by, a person
with knowledge of the act, event, etc.
4)

The memorandum, etc, Is kept in the regular
course or conduct of a business activity.

855

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

5)

It was the regular practice of the business activity
to make the memorandum, report, record, or data
compilation by writing, typing," electronic, optical
or similar means.

6) All of the foregoing conditions are shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified
witnesses. (S45 R130)

0.

What is the foundation testimony for the admission
of a business records exception?

A.

A custodian or other qualified witness must testify that
the conditions for the admission of the business
records exception under S45 R130 are present.

0.

What is meant by "business activity" under S45
R130?

A

"Business activity"should not be confined to activities
of a commercial enterprise. It should include activities
of any profession. occupation, and calling of every
kind, whether or not conducted for profit or for legitimate
purposes. (See R2[bJ REE). Thus the logbook of a
security guard is deemed a business record. Even a
housewife's budget journal is a business record. The
business or enterprise maybe legal or illegal. Thus the
diary of a jueteng bookie where he kept records of
bets and winnings is a business record and admissible
to prove the contents thereof.

0.

Is routineness and repetitiveness of the business
record a requirement for the business records
exception?

A.

No longer. While routineness and repetitiveness were
important in the business entries exception under the
former S43 R130, they have been de-emphasized in

re

omission of writing" and typing" in the relevant portion of Section
4is a clear dratting oversight

856

Paro! Evidence Rule

the present 45 R130. This is shown by the fact that
records of diagnoses or opinions are included in the
business records exception. What ls important is that
the records were kept in the regular course or conduct

of a business activity. (FRE Advisory Committee Note).
0.

Give examples of business records.

A.

Entries in the following: Books of account, invoices,
statements of account, bills of lading, log-book of a
security guard, medical charts by nurses, interns or
resident physicians in a hospital.

•

May the admissibility of a business record be
challenged on the ground of lack of trustworthiness?

A.

It is submitted that it may be. Under the REE, The
adverse party may challenge the admissibility of an
electronic business record by evidence of the
untrustworthiness of the source of information or the
method or circumstances of the preparation, transmission

or storage thereof. (See S2 R8 REE). Under FRE
801(6) from which S45 R130 was based, the
opponent may show that the source of information or
the method or circumstances of preparation of the
business record indicate a lack of trustworthiness. For
instance the opponent may show that the business
record was prepared for purposes of litigation
rather than recordkeeping. The burden of showing
untrustworthiness is on the adverse party or opponent,
not on the proponent.

0.

Are business records prima facie evidence of the
facts stated therein?

A.

No longer under the 2020 Rules on Evidence. (S45
R130)

857

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

May a medical certificate qualify
business records exception?

under the

A.

No. Medical certificates which are issued upon the
request of a patient and which certify that the patient

is suffering from an ailment or injury are hearsay
unless the doctor who issued the certificate is also
presented in court. It cannot be said that the certificate
was issued in the doctor's professional capacity or in
the performance of a duty However, it is submitted
that statements made for puroses of medical
diagnosis or treatment and describing medical history,
or past or present symptoms, pain, or sensations, or
the inception or general character of the cause or
external source thereof insofar as reasonably_pertinent
diagnosis or treatment are excepted from the
to
hearsay rule. (FRE 803\4]). Under FRE 803(4), these
statements are admissible even if the declarant is
available as a witness.
Also a record of medical diagnoses or opinions
are admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule
under S45 R130 which specifically mentions "opinions,
or diagnoses."
Q.

May a diary qualify as a business record exception?

A.

1t depends on the purpose for or the manner by which
the diary was kept. A diary kept in the course of the
diarist's business activity, occupation, or calling would
qualify under the business-entry exception. Thus a
diary by a casino dealer of tips he received from
customers would qualify under this exception as
would a desk calendar-appointment diary. (Keogh v
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 713 F.2d 496)
On the other hand, a diary of doings for one's personal
satisfaction would probably not qualify. (ANTONIO R.
BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 251 [2004 ed.)).

858

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

Two days after a railroad crossing accident, the
train engineer gave a written statement at a freight
office of the railroad company where he was
interviewed by the assistant superintendent. The
train engineer died before the trial. May his
statement be glven in evidence as a business
record exception?

A.

No, A business entry must relate to the business of
the enterprise. The business of the company is the
railroad business. An accident report may affect a
business in a sense that it affords information on
which management may act. It is not however typical
of entries made systematically or as a matter of
routine to record events or occurrences, to reflect
transactions with others, or to provide internal
controls. Simply put the accident report is not one in
the regular course of business. Unlike payrolls,
accounts receivables, bills of lading, and the like,
these reports are calculated for use essentially in the
court, not in the business. Their primary utility is in
litigating not railroading. (Palmer v. Hoffman, 318 U.S.
109 [1943], cited In ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 251-253 {2004 ed.]).

Q.

The plaintiff worked for the defendant railroad
company as a freight brakeman. The plaintiff
claimed that because of a defective brake, he was
unable to stop a runaway train car, as a result of
which he suffered a disabling injury. The defendant
offered in evidence an accident report, made by
the trainmaster of the defendant, and which stated
that the train car's brakes were tested immediately
prior to and after the accident and that nothing
wrong was found. An assistant general foreman
of the defendant identified the accident report and
testified that the making of such accident reports

859

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

was part of the defendant's regular course of
business. The trainmaster who made the accident
report was not presented In court. May the
accident report be admitted in evidence over
hearsay objection?
A.

Yes. Business records are excepted from the hearsay

rule. The making of accident reports was in the
regular course of the defendant's business. It is not
altogether correct to say that such reports are made
merely for litigating; they are undoubtedly of utility to
the defendant in ascertaining whether the equipment
involved was defective so that future accidents might
be prevented.
The court distinguished this case from Palmer v.
Hoffman, supra, where the train engineer who made
the accident report had been personally involved in
the accident and thus had a strong motive to exculpate
himself. Here the trainmaster was not involved in the
accident and could not have been the target of a
lawsuit by the plaintiff. (Lewis v. Baker, 526 F.2d 470

(2 Cir. 1975])
Electronic business records exception under the REE
Q.

What is the electronic business records exception
under the REE?

A.

A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation of
acts, conditions, events, diagnoses, or opinions made
by electronic, optical, or other similar means at or
near the time by or from transmission or supply of
information by, a person with knowledged thereof, and
kept in the regular course or conduct of a business
activity, and such was the regular practice to make
the memorandum, etc., by electronic, optical or similar

860

Parol Evidence Rule

means, all of which are shown by the testimony of the
custodian or other qualified witness, is excepted from
the hearsay rule. (S1 RB REE),
With the passage of the new S45 R130 on the
2020 Rules on Evidence, S1 RS REE has become
redundant since S45 R130 applies to both nonelectronic and electronic documents.

Former testimony or deposition
Q.

What are the requirements in order for a
testimony or deposition at a former proceeding
(Judicial or administrative) to be admissible as an
exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are: (PDSC)
(a) The witness or deponent Is dead or out of the
Philippines or who cannot, with due diligence, be
found therein, or is unavailable or otherwise
unable to testify.
(b) The former case or proceeding involves the same
parties and subject matter
(c) The adverse party had the opportunity to crossexamine the witness or deponent in the former
case or proceeding. (S49 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence)

Q.

Compare the rule on former testimony or deposition
under $49 R130 to that in criminal cases under

$1(0) R115.
A.

The rule on former testimony or deposition under S49
R130 is substantially similar to that in criminal cases
(S1[f R115) with the notable distinction that a
deposition is not mentioned in S1(f) R115. Taking into
account the constitutional right of confrontation, it is

861

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II

opined that the difference should be interpreted in
favor of the accused, that is, a deposition in another
case or proceeding is inadmissible against the accused
for being hearsay,
Q.

Are statements made during preliminary investigation
covered by the former testimony or deposition
exception?

A.

No, since there is no right to cross-examine during
preliminary investigation. (S3(e) R112)

•

P filed an action for collection against O (Case 1)
with the deposition of X being taken therein. The
court dismissed Case 1 and the order of dismissal
became final and executory. P filed Case 2 against
D. Case 2 involves the same subject matter. May

P introduce in Case 2 the deposition of X if any of
the circumstances in Section 4(c)(1) to (5) of R23
are present?

A.

Yes Under S5 R23. when an action has been
dismissed and another action involving the same
subject is afterward brought between the same parties
or their representatives or successors in interest. all
depositions lawfully taken and duly filed in the former
action may be used in the latter as if originally taken
therefor."

Q.

Pvs. A in a civil case with the deposition of X
being taken therein before trial. During the trial
may P introduce in evidence against A the
deposition of X even if X is not dead or unable
to testify?

re requirement lhat tho prior action rust have been dismissed before
depositions taken for use in it can be used in a subseuent action was
considered an oversight by U.S. courts who have ignored this requirement. See
Wright & Milter, Fecteral Practice and Procedure Cr»l 52150. What is important
is that the second action involves the same parties ant subject matter,

862

Perol Evidence Rule

A.

Yes provided that P is able to show that any of the
circumstances in S4(c) R23 is present. An example
would be if X resides more than 100 kilometers from
the place where he is to testify or if P, upon
application and notice, is able to show that such
exceptional circumstances exists as to make it
desirable, in the interest of justice and with due regard
to the importance of presenting the testimony of X In
open court, to allow the deposition to be used (S4[c]
R23). Take note that since the deposition was taken
In the same case, it is S4(c) R23 and not S49 R130
which governs.

Q

Jovita hired Pacita as her househelp. Pacita was

prosecuted for qualified theft for stealing Jovita's
jewelry (Case 1) Jovita testified in Case 1 that
Pacita had confessed to her that she had sold the

jewelry to Francisco, Pacita was convicted in
Case 1. Subsequently a prosecution for violation
of the anti-fencing law (Case 2) was brought

against Francisco. In the preliminary Investigation
of Case 2, Pacita testified and executed an affidavit
wherein she stated that she had sold the jewelry
to Francisco. During the trial, the prosecution no
longer presented Jovita and Pacita as witnesses.
a)

ls Jovita's testimony in Case 1 admisslble
against Francisco?

b) Are Pacita's testimony and affidavit in the
preliminary investigation of Case 2 admissible
against Francisco?
A.

a) No. Jovita's testimony in Case 1 is hearsay. It
bears stressing that Franclsco was not a party (accused)
in Case 1. Jovita did not reiterate her testimony in
Case 2 nor was Pacita presented as a witness therein

863

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
to testify on the admission she purportedly made to

Jovita. Thus there was no opportunity to crossexamine Pacita.

b)

No. Pacita's testimony and affidavit in the preliminary

investigation of Case 2 are hearsay against
Francisco since there is no opportunity to cross-

examine in preliminary investigation. (Francisco v.
People, G.R. No. 146584, 12 July 2004)
Q,

P was hit by the bus of X company. A criminal
case for reckless imprudence was filed against
the bus driver Y upon complaint of P, While the
criminal case was pending, P filed a tort case
against X company. Subsequently Y was acquitted
on ground that he was not negligent.
a)

May P Introduce in evidence against X company
the testimony of a witness in the criminal case
over objection that it is hearsay?

b) Assuming that Y was convicted, is the
judgment of conviction admissible against X
company in a proceeding brought to enforce
X company's subsidiary liability?
A.

a) No. The testimony of a witness in a prior criminal
case for reckless imprudence against the employee
(bus driver) cannot be introduced in a subsequent civil
case for tort filed by the offended party against the
employer (bus company) to enforce the latter's
vicarious liability under Article 2180 of the Civil Code.
This is because the employer is not a party in the
criminal case and thus had no opportunity to crossexamine the witness.

864

Parol Evidence Rule

However where the employer failed to object to
the TSNs when they were offered in evidence, the
same are admissible, The driver's acquittal is of no
moment since the tort case is an independent civil
action. (Manliclic v. Calaunan, 25 January 2007)

b)

Q.

Yes. A judgment of conviction of the employee is
however conclusive upon the employer in a
motion or action to enforce the employer's subsidiary
liability under Article 103 of the Revised Penal
Code and said judgment is admissible in evidence in
the proceedings brought to enforce the employer's
subsidiary liability.

In 1987, the Republic, through the PCGG, filed
Civil Case No. 0009, an action for reconveyance
and reversion, against Jose Africa, Ferdinand
Marcos, Imelda Marcos, Juan Ponce Enrile, et al.
The complaint alleges that shares In Eastern
Telecommunlcations Philippines Inc. (ETPI) were
illegally acquired for the beneficial interest of the
Marcoses. Subsequently Victor Africa, the son of
Jose Africa who had died, filed Civil Case No.
0130 with the Sandiganbayan against the PCGG
seeking to nullify the PCGG orders asking him to
surrender the ETPl shares and to desist from
acting as an ETPI director and shareholder.
Subsequently the SB ordered the consolidation
of CC No. 0009 with several incident cases
including CC No. 0130. The PCGG in CC No. 0130
took the deposition of Maurice Bain, a former
officer of ETPI, before the Philippine Consul
General in London, England. The deposition was
sought to be introduced by the PCGG in CC No.
0009. The Respondents objected on the ground
that the deposition did not comply with S47 R130
which requlres identity of parties, they not having
865

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME l

been parties to CC No, 0130. The PCGG on the
other hand argues that since CC No. 0009 and CC

No. 0130 were consolidated, the actions were
merged into one and hence it is S4(c) R23 and not
$49 R130 which applies. Under S4(c) R23 the
deposition may be introduced in evidence for
any purpose if the deponent is outside of the
Philippines. Is the deposition admissible in CC
No. 0009?

A.

No. The consolidation here was merely for purposes
of joint trial but each case retained its separate
character and required the entry of a separate
judgment. The consolidation did not merge CC No.
0009 and CC No. 0130 into a single action and cause
the parties in one to be the parties to another. Thus
the deposition was not taken in CC No. 0009 but in a
separate or former proceeding, CC No, 0130, in which
case the requirements of S49 R130 requiring identity

of parties applies. Since the Respordents were not
parties to CC No, 0130, the deposition taken therein
was hearsay as against them and inadmissible upon
proper and timely objection, (Republic v. Sandiganbayan,
GR. 152375, 16 December 2011).1°
Act or declaration about pedigree
0.

What are the requirements in order for an act or
declaration about pedigree to be admissible as an
exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are: (DRAPE)

" his dissent, Justice Antonio Carpio states that the notice to take
deposition was made in CC No. 0009 as indicated in the caption of the notice to
taxe deposition wion states Civil Case No D009 (incident Case No. 0130).
Besides the notice stated that it was also going to be used in CC 009. Thus
$4(0) +23 was applicable ad the deposition can be used in lieu ot Bane's in-

court testimony,

866

Paro Evidence Rule

a) The declarant rs dead or unable to testify
b) The act or declaration is about pedigree of another
person related to the declarant by birth, adoption,
or marriage or, in the absence thereof, with whose
family he or she was so intimately associated as
to be likely to have accurate information concerning
his pedigree 9
c)

The relationship between the declarant and the
relative is shown by evidence other than such act
or declaration.

d)

The act or declaration occurred before the controversy
(ante [item_ motam), (S41 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence).

Q.

What does pedigree in S41 R130 mean?

A.

The word "pedigree" includes relationship, family
genealogy, birth, marriage, death, the dates when and
the places were these facts occurred, and the names
of the relatives. It embraces also facts of family history
intimately connected with pedigree. (S41 R130).

0.

Give an example of act or declaration about

pedigree as a hearsay exception.
A

In the settlement of the estate of deceased Pedro,
Maria who claims to be the wife of Pedro will present
witness W. W will testify that he heard Jose say that
his brother Pedro has a wife named Maria. Jose is
already dead at the time of W's testimony. Here
Jose's declaration concerns the pedigree of his
relative (brother) Pedro, that is, that Pedro has a wife
named Maria.

ore words in italics have been added by the 202O amnendrrents to the
Rules on Evidence.

867

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

In the preceding example, must the relationship
between Jose and Pedro be shown by evidence
other than Jose's declaration?

A.

Yes,

The law requires that the declarant must be

related to the person whose pedigree is the subject of
the declaration by birth, adoption, marriage or intimate

association and that such relationship is shown by
evidence other than such act or declaration. Hence

Jose's declaration that Pedro is his brother is not
competent proof of their relationship. There must be
preliminary evidence other than the declaration that

Pedro Is Jose's brother, such as for example, the
testimony of another witness or birth records, The
preliminary proof will lay the foundation for the
introduction of the main evidence, that is, that Pedro
has a wife named Maria.
Q.

In the settlement of the estate of deceased Pedro,
Maria who claims to be the the wife of Pedro will
present witness W, W will testify that he heard
Pedro say that he has a wife named Marla. ls
evidence other than Pedro's declaration needed
in order to prove the relationship between Pedro
and Maria?

A.

No. Where the pedigree of a person subject of the
declaration is that person's own relationship to the
declarant, it seems absurd to require, as a foundation
for the admission of the declaration, proof of the very
fact which the declaration is offered to establish. The
preliminary proof would render the main evidence
unnecessary. (Tison v. Court of Appeals, G.R. NO.
121027, 31 July 1997; see also Hartman's Estate,
107 P 105 cited in Moran, Comments on the Rules of

Court, Vol. 5, 1980 ed., 322). The basis for the
exception then is logic. The other basis for the

868

Parol Evidence Rule

exception is necessity, that is to prevent a failure
of justice since the declarant, whose estate is in
controversy. is dead. (Tison v. Court of Appeals, id.).
Q.

Settlement of the estate of deceased Pedro.
Simon, who claims to be the grandson of Pedro
will present witness W. W will testify that Pedro's
son Ruben (who predeceased Pedro) had said
that he has a son named Simon. Is evidence other
than Ruben's declaration needed in order to prove
the relationship between Ruben and Simon?

A.

Yes. While the declaration is about the declarant
Ruben's own relationship to Simon, the latter is however
not claiming from Ruben's estate but from the estate
of Pedro by virtue of the right of representation.
Hence the consideration of necessity which was the
basis for the Tison ruling is not present since it is not
Ruben's estate which is in controversy. In other words
the exception does not apply where the claimant does
not seek to claim from the estate of the declarant
himself and but merely to establish a right through his
declarations to the property of some other member of
the family. (Tison v. Court of Appeals, id.)

Q.

After the estate of the late Luciano Raval had
been distributed by a court order to his widow
and children, Danilo Casim sued the latter for
recovery of his inheritance as an alleged illegltlmate
child of the deceased. The only evidence he
introduced during the trial to prove that he was
the son of Luciano Raval was the testimony of
Maria Seva. Over the vigorous objection of
counsel for the defendants that Seva's testimony
was hearsay evidence, the court allowed her to
testify that she was the godmother of Danilo
Casim; that during the baptismal party, she was

869

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME ii

introduced to Luciano Raval; and that the latter
confessed to her on that occasion that he,
Luciano Raval, was the father of Danilo Casim.
When counsel for Danilo Casim announced

that he had no further evidence and that he was
submitting his case on the basis of the testimony
of Marla Seva, the counsel for the defendants

promptly moved that the testimony of Maria Seva
be stricken from the records on the ground that
her testimony was hearsay evidence and therefore

inadmissible. The court, however, ruled that the
testimony was admissible and should remain on
the record.

Explain why the court was correct or in error,
as the case may be, in initially admitting In

evidence the testimony of Maria Seva and in
subsequently maintaining its admissibility, (83
Bar Q8).

A.

The court was correct in admitting Maria Seva's
testimony over the objection that it was hearsay.
Under the Rules on Evidence, the declaration of
a deceased person in respect to the pedigree of
another person related to him by birth may be
received in evidence where it occurred before the
controversy.
Here the declaration of Luciano related to the
pedigree of Danilo Casim who was Luciano's son.
Independent and preliminary evidence of Luciano's
relationship to Danilo is not necessary since Luciano's
declaration was about his own relationship to Danilo.

"!

4ad the case been fled on or after the effectivity of the Farily Code or
3 August 1988. the action, which in effect sees to establish Danilo Casir's
illegitimate fiiation, would have already prescribed since It should have beer
brought during the ltetime of Luc ano, the alleged parent. (Ant. 175, Family Cade)

870

Parol Evidence Rule

Declaration against interest
Q.

What are the requirements in order that a
declaration against interest will be considered as
an exception to the hearsay rule?

A.

The requirements are:
a) The declarant must be dead or unable to testify.
b) The declaration must be against the interest
(pecuniary, moral, or penal) of the declarant.
0)

The fact asserted in the declaration was at the
time it was made so far contrary to declarant's
own interest, that a reasonable man in his position
would not have made the declaration unless he
believed it to be true.

d) A statement tending to expose the declarant to
criminal liability and offered to exculpate the
accused is not admissible unless corroborating
circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness

of the statement. (S40 R130, 2020 Rules on
Evidence)"
•

ls there a requirement that a declaration against
interest be made ante litem motam?

A.

None. The true test in reference to the reliability of the
declaration is not whether it was made ante litem
motam, as is the case wth reference to some classes
of hearsay evidence, but whether the declaration was
uttered under circumstances justifying the conclusion
that there was no probable motive to falsify' The
fact that a declaration against interest is made after
the controversy had arisen would even lend more
strength to IL
7re fourth reaulrerent was added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.
_ehauco u. Atlantic, Gulf & Pacific Company 84 Ph. 330, 342-343 (1949)

871

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Distinguish a declaration against Interest from a party

Q.

admission.

A.
DECLARATION
AGAINST INTEREST

PARTY ADMISSION

Made by a non-party, i.e.

Made by a party.

the declarant.

Must be against the
declarant's interest.

Need not be against the
admitter's interest.

Hearsay but admissible as

Not hearsay and thus

an exception to the
hearsay rule.

admissible.

The declarant must be
dead or unable to testify.

No requirement that the
admitter is dead or unable to

testify.
Admissible against

Admissible only
against the admitter.

declarant and third
persons.

0.

N had a disagreement with O and P over a parcel
of land. The exchange of words led to a bolo duel
between N and O in which N was killed and O was
fatally wounded. Before O died he made a written
statement before the Municipal Judge of the town
that it was he who killed N and that he alone was
Involved against N in the duel. A case for
homicide was presented against P on the theory
that he participated in the fight since he was also
involved in the exchange of words and was at the
scene of the crime, P offered as part of his
872

Paro! Evidence Rule

defense the written statement of O, which the trial
court ruled to be inadmissible as being contrary
to the hearsay rule. Should such evidence have
been disallowed and denied admission? Why?
(81 Bar Q8).

A.

No the evidence should have been admitted. While
O's declaration is not admissible as a dying
declaration since it was not about the circumstances
of O's demise but of another person's, It should have
been admitted as a declaration against interest. O's
declaration was against his penal or pecuniary
interest. (People • Toledo, 51 Phil 825).

Q,

Allan and Marita were married on 1 August 1989.
After 2 months Narita, In order to spite Allan, told
him in the presence of their friends that the 10year-old Liza whom she claimed to be her niece
was actually her daughter by a certain Basilio, a
married man.
In 1992, Narita filed a petition for declaration
of nullity of her marriage to Allan. The trial court
nullified the marriage. The decision nullifying the
marriage was appealed and Narita died during the
pendency of the appeal. Soon after, the legal wife
of Basilio sued for legal separation based on
sexual infidelity in view of Basilio's love affair
with Narita. At the trial Allan was called by
Basilio's wife to testify that Narita told him (Allan)
during their marriage that Liza was her love child
by Basilio. Counsel for Basilio objected on the
ground that Allan's testimony would be hearsay.

Assuring the applicability of the fourth requisite of declaration against
interest, the statement would have been admissible. The circumstances ind.cate
the statements' trustworthiness since it could also be considered as part of the

res gestae

873

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
a) If you were the judge, how would you rule on

the objection?
b) Would your answer be different if Narita had
not died?

A.

a) I would overrule the objection.
The statement of Narita that she had a love child
by Basilio is a declaration against interest which ls an
exception to the hearsay rule. The declaration Is
against Narita's moral or penal interest.

b) My answer would be different. Since there is no
showing that Narita is unable to testify, her

statement would not qualify as a declaration against
interest and would thus be hearsay.
Q.

Plalntlff Rogelio Dantis filed an action for
recovery of possession of land against Defendant.
Defendant introduced an affidavit of Plaintiffs late
grandfather Ignacio Dantis, wherein Ignacio said
that his son Emilio (Plaintiff's father) had sold the
land to Defendant's father. May the court admit
the affidavit into evidence over a hearsay objection?

A.

No. The affidavit is hearsay. It does not qualify as a
declaration against interest becauso tho declaration
was not against the declarant's interest but against
that of his son. It was not the declaration of the seller
himself but of his father, (Dantis v. Maghinang, 10
April 2013). Besides, the act of selling is not one
"which at the time it was made was so far contrary to
the declarant's own interest, that a reasonable man in
his position would not have made the declaration
unless he believed it to be true."

874

Paro! Evidence Rule

0.

D was apprehended after illegal drugs were found
in the trunk of his car. D told the police officers
that he was transporting the drugs given to him
by X and owned by Y. In the prosecution or X and
Y for drug trafficking, may the police officer testify
over hearsay objection about the statement made
to him by D?

A.

No. Only those portions of the declaration against
interest which tend to expose the declarant to criminal
liability are admissible as an exception to the hearsay
rule Those portions which do not inculpate the
declarant or which inculpate another person are
excluded from the coverage of the exemption "even if
they are made within a broader narrative that is
generally self-inculpatory." Thus the statement of
declarant D that he was transporting drugs given to
him by X and belonging to Y are not admissible
against X and Y for being hearsay.°

Part of the res gestae

0.

State the res gestae exception.

A.

The res gestae exception covers statements which
are admissible in evidence as part of the res gestae
It actually consists of two exceptions: (1) excited
utterances, and (2) verbal acts.

Q.

Define the term "excited utterances" as a hearsay
exception.

A.

Statements made by a person while a startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto, under the stress of excitement

wtiarson v. United States, 512 U.8 594 (1994)

875

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

caused by the occurrence! regarding the circumstances
thereof, may be given in evidence as part of the res
gestae. (S44 R130). S44 R130 is adopted from FRE
803(2), providing for the hearsay exception for an
excited utterance, that is, [a] statement relating to a
startling event or condition, made while the declarant
was under the stress of excitement that it caused .1
Q.

Mr. Carrascoso took an Air France flight from
Manila to Rome. While on a stop-over in Bangkok,
he was forcibly transferred from the first class to

the tourist class in order to make way for "a white
man." Mr. Carrascoso resisted his transfer and a
commotion occurred on board the plane. The
purser recorded the Incident in his notebook. Mr.
Carrascoso sued Air France. During the trial, Mr.
Carrascoso testified that after his forcible transfer
to the tourist class, he went to the pantry where
the purser told him that he (the purser) had
recorded the incident in his notebook; then the
purser read out the entry to him: "First-class
passenger was forced to go to the tourist class
against his will, and that the captain refused to
intervene." Assume that Air France's counsel
moved to strike out the statement regarding what
the purser said on the ground that it ls hearsay.
Should the court grant the motion to strike out?
A.

No, the court should not grant the motion to strike out.

Under the Rules of Evidence, statements made
while a startling occurrence is taking place or
immediately prior or subsequent thereto, under the
% ra italicized phrase was acded in the 202O rules on Evidence This
expressly Incorporates intc the provision case law that [ne statement was fade
while under the influence of te startling occurrence
w is to be noted that there is no requirement in FRE 803(2) tat the
statement be made while the start'ing occurrence ls taking place cr Immediately
before or after it

876

Parol Evidence Rule

stress of excitement caused by the occurrence with

respect to the circumstances thereof are excepted
from the hearsay rule
Here the statement of the purser was made while
the startling occurrence was still fresh and continued
to be felt, the excitement not having died down as yet,
and it related to the circumstances regarding the ouster
incident. (Air France v. Carrascoso, 18 SCRA 165)
Q.

While members of the Sigma Rho Fraternity were
having lunch at a canteen in U.P., masked men
suddenly attacked them with baseball bats. As a
result the Sigma Rhoans suffered injuries and one
of them later died, Shortly thereafter, a police
officer interviewed bystanders who told him that
they could not recognize the attackers since they
were masked. Is the testimony of the police officer
admissible over objection that it is hearsay?

A.

Yes. There Is no doubt that a sudden attack on a
group peacefully eating lunch on a school campus is a
startling occurrence. Considering that the statements of
the bystanders were made immediately after the
startling occurrence, these are admissible as part of
the res gestae. (People v. Feliciano, 5 May 2014,
Leonen, J.).

Q.

Dencio barged into the house of Marcela, tied her
to a chair and robbed her of assorted pieces of
jewelry and money. Dencio then brought Candida,
Marcela's maid, to a bedroom where he raped her.
Marcela could hear Candida crying and pleading:
"Huwag! Maawa ka sa akin!" After raping Candida,
Dencio fled from the house with the loot. Candida
then untied Marcela and rushed to the police
station about a kilometer away and told Police
Officer Roberto Maawa that Dencio had barged

877

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

into the house of Marcela, tied the latter to a chair
and robbed her of her jewelry and money, Candida
also related to the police officer that despite her

pleas, Dencio had raped her. The policeman
noticed that Candida was hysterical and on the
verge of collapse. Dencio was charged with
robbery with rape. During the trial, Candida can

no longer be located.
a) If the prosecution presents Police Officer
Roberto Maawa to testify on what Candida
had told him, would such testimony of the
policeman be hearsay? Explain.

xxx
A.

(05 Bar Q16a)

The testimony of the policeman would be hearsay but
would be admissible under the res gestae exception
to the hearsay rule.
Under the Rules on Evidence, statements made
by a person while a startling occurrence is taking
place or immediately prior or subsequent thereto with
respect to the circumstances thereof, may be given in
evidence as part of the res gestae.
Although the statement was made after Candida
had run for a kilometer, it was admissible under the
res gestae exception since It was made while Candida
was still under the stress of excitement caused by the
startling occurrence, she being hysterical and on the
verge of collapse. The Supreme Court has held that
a statement made 9 hours after the killing but while
the declarant was still under the stress of excitement
caused by the startling event was admissible as part
of the res gestae. (People v. Berame, 30 July 1976)

878

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

May a statement made 11 hours after the startling
incident be admissible as part of the res gestae?

A

Yes, provided that the doclarant was still under the
stress of excitement caused by the startling occurrence
when he made the declaration. (Zarate v. People, 3
July 2009). What is important is not the lapse of time
from the event to the statement but the fact that the
declarant was still under such stress when he uttered
the statement.8°

Q.

In a murder case, may a statement made by the
victim 3 days after the shooting be admitted as
part of the res gestae?

A.

Yes, where he was still under the influence of the
startling event and had no opportunity to fabricate.
Immediately after the shooting incident, the victim had
to undergo extensive surgery for the gunshot wounds
he sustained. He was unable to talk and had difficulty
in breathing, but he managed to convey his answers
to the questions propounded to him through writing
and moving his head and hands. During the three
days that intervened botween the shooting incident
and when the statements were made, Belen had no
time to deliberately fabricate a story. He was in the
hospital, receiving treatment for his numerous wounds,
fighting for his life. He could not even speak or
communicate verbally because of the intubation in his
lungs. Given this situation, it is clear that he had no time
to contrive a false statement against the accused
(People v. Vargas, 18 September 2019, Caguioa, J.)

gee supra

879

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Should there be proof that the statement was

made under the stress of excitement caused by

the occurrence?
A.

If the statement was made while the startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto, it can be presumed that the
declarant made the statement under the stress of
excitement caused by the occurrence." Otherwise,
there must be proof that the statement was made
under such stress in order for it to be considered as
an excited utterance.

0.

Gerry is being tried for rape. The prosecuton's
evidence sought to establish that at about 9:00
P.M. of 20 January 1994, Gerry went to complainant
June's house to invite her to watch the festivities

going on at the town plaza. June accepted the
invitatlon, Upon reaching the public market, which
was just a stone's throw away from June's house,
Gerry forcibly dragged June towards the banana
grove behind the market where he was able to
have carnal knowledge with June for about an
hour. June did not immediately go home
thereafter, and it was only in the early morning of
the following day that aha narrated her ordeal to
her daughter Liza. Liza testified in court as to
what revealed to her.
1) Is the testimony of Liza hearsay?
2) ls it admissible in evidence against the objection
of the defense? (94 Bar Q17).

A.

1) The testimony of Liza is hearsay.

gee People v. Feliciano, supra; Phoenix Construction, Inc v. Dionisio,
10 March 1997

880

Parol Evidence Rule

Under the law of evidence, hearsay is defined as
an out-of-court statement offered to prove the truth of
the matter asserted therein,
Here Liza was testifying on June's out-of-court
statement and it was offered to prove the truth of
the matter asserted therein, that is, that Gerry had
raped June.

2) No, the testimony of Liza is not admissible against
the objection of the defense that it is hearsay.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
rule, the statement must be made while a startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior
or after it.
Here June's statement was made the day after
the rape and there is no indication that June was still
under the stress of excitement caused by the rape
when she narrated the same to Liza.
Q.

Accused XXX raped his daughter AAA on 8 and 15
April 2001. XXX was tried for rape and during the
trial AAA testified against his father. However she
died before she could be cross-examined by XXX.

a) Should the testimony of AAA be expunged?
In an effort to salvage the case against XXX,
the prosecution presented as witnesses EEE
and Calug.

EEE, an aunt of AAA, being the sister of the
mother of the latter, testified that at noontime on
16 April 2001, AAA arrived at her house, She
noticed that AAA was sad and crying. Upon her
inquiry, AAA told her that she was raped by her
father on 8 April and three times hours ago on 15
April 2001, During the few days of AAA's stay at

881

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

her house, she often saw AAA crying. A few days
after, AAA went to the house of Pedro de los
Santos to work as a house helper. Her employer,
Pedro de los Santos, helped her in instituting these
rape cases, and EEE and de los Santos accompanied

AAA to report the incident to the police.
Calug testified that on 18 April 2001, AAA
reported for work for the first time as a
househelper in the house of Pedro de los Santos,
He noticed that AAA was sad and lonely, and
often saw her crying. She confided to him her
problems, and revealed to him that she was raped
by her own father on April 8 and 15 of that year

2001. He noticed that AAA had told their employer,
Pedro de los Santos, of what had befallen her.
After eight months, she left the de los Santos
household, and he did not know anymore of her
whereabouts until she heard from the radio
broadcast that AAA was dead.

b)

A.

May the court admit the testimonies of EEE
and Calug over objection that these relate to
hearsay?

a) Yes. An accused is guaranteed by no less than
the Constitution the right to cross-examine a witness.
Section 14(2), Article Ill of the Constitution provides
that an accused shall have the right to meet the

witnesses face to face, which is echoed in S1(f) R115.
The right of an accused to cross-examine a witness is
essential to test the credibility and truthfulness of the
testimony offered and likewise provides an opportunity for
the accused to demonstrate substantial inconsistencies
that could create reasonable doubt as to his guilt. In
this regard, the RTC was correct in excluding AAA's
direct testimony from the records notwithstanding the
incriminating contents thereof,

882

Parol Evidence Rule

b)

Yes as part of the res gestae and therefore
excepted from the hearsay rule. In the case at
bar, AAA went to, and arrived at the house of her
aunt EEE by noon on 16 April 2001 - about 12
hours after she was ravished by her father. She
left their house that day after she was raped three
times by her own father, and went to her aunt's
house located in the same municipality. Upon
arrival at her aunt's house, AAA was sad and
crying, and revealed to her aunt that she was
raped by her father. Although her utterances may
not have been made immediately or simultaneous
with the actual rape, the said utterances were "so
connected with it as to make the act or declaration
and the main fact inseparable, or be generated by
an excited feeling which extends, without break or
let down, from the moment of the event they
illustrate." On this factual backdrop, It ls clearly
evident that AAA made this revelation to her aunt
before she could make a deliberate design or had
the opportunity "to devise or contrive" anything
contrary to the real facts that occurred. (People v.
XXX, 22 August 2018, Caguioa. J.)

Q

Jay Lourd was shot. His wife came to his aid and
he said to her, "Panggay, you see if Gilbert is still
here." Jay Lourd later died in hospital, In the trial
for murder against Gilbert, is his wife's testimony
as to what Jay Lourd said to her admissible over a
hearsay objection?

A.

Yes as part of the res gestae. However in the
absence of corroborative or circumstantial evidence,
the statement was not proof that Gilbert shot Jay
Lourd. (People v. Floresta, 17 June 2019, PerlasBernabe, J.).

883

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

Alejo was stabbed in the abdomen. He immediately
called for help and a policeman promptly approached
him. He told the policeman that he felt he would
die from the serious wound inflicted on him by
Danilo who has a grudge against him. He was
brought to a hospital for treatment where, on the
same day, he was shot and killed by someone
whose identity could not be established by an
eye-witness. Eventually, Danilo was charged in
court for the death of Alejo. The prosecution had
to build its case on circumstantial evidence. At
the ensuing trial, the policeman was presented to
testify on the declaration made to him by Alejo.
The defense objected. Meeting the objection, the
prosecution argued for the admissibility of the
evidence as a dying declaration (ante mortem
statement) or as part of the res gestae, either of
which, when deemed competent evidence as an
exception to the hearsay rule, would demonstrably
be relevant to the ultimate fact in issue, the guilt
of Danilo for the death of Ale]o. The defense
countered by arguing that no facts relevant to the
stabbing can be relevant to the shooting.
Is the contention of the prosecution with
respect to the relevancy and competency of
evidence correct? Discuss fully. (92 Bar Q2).

A.

The argument of the prosecution with respect to
the relevancy and competency of the evidence is

not correct.
The statement of Alejo is not admissible as a
dying declaration because it did not relate to the
cause and circumstances surrounding his fatal shooting.

The statement would have been admissible as
part of the res gestae since it was made immediately
after a startling occurrence, i.e., his stabbing.
884

Parol Evidence Rule

However it is not admissible for it would violate the
similar acts rule. (S35 R130). Evidence that Danilo
stabbed Alejo is not admissible to prove that Danilo
was the one who shot Alejo. The defense argument
that no facts relating to the stabbing can be relevant
to the shooting was in substance an objection based
on the similar acts rule.

0.

Two hours after Lt. Yap of the 2" Air Division,
PAF, at the Mactan Air Base in Lapulapu City, was
shot with a .45 caliber pistol, his Division
Commander, Brig. Gen. A, visited him at the Cebu
Doctor's Hospital in Cebu City where he was
immediately brought for treatment of the gunshot
wound. Lt. Yap told A that it was Jose Comen who
shot him. Forthwith, A, who is a law graduate,
took the initiative of taking down in long hand the
statement of Lt. Yap. The latter narrated the
events surrounding the incident and categorically
stated that it was Jose Comen who shot him. Lt.
Yap signed the statement in the presence of A
and the attending nurse. Ten days lator, Lt. Yap
died as a consequence of the gunshot wound, An
information for murder was filed against Jose
Comen.
At the trial, the above statement of Lt. Yap
marked as Exhibit X was presented and identifled
by A who did not, however, testify that Lt. Yap
read it or that it was read to him before he (Yap)
signed it. A, nevertheless, testified that, as above
stated, Lt. Yap told him that it was Jose Comen
who shot him. The defense objected to the
testimony of A and to the admission of Exh. X on
the ground that they are hearsay, The prosecution
contended that both are exceptions to the hearsay
rule as they are part of the res gestae.

885

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(a) Is the prosecution correct?

(b) If the statement cannot be admitted as part of
the res gestae, may it be considered as a
dying declaration?
(c) If the statement of A as to the revelation of Lt.
Yap is not admissible for being hearsay, may
it be admitted as an independently relevant
statement? (91 Bar 016)

A.

(a) No, the prosecution is not correct.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
rule, the statement must be made while the startling
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto. Here the statement was made
two hours after the shooting and there is no showing
that Lt. Yap was still under the stress of excitement
caused by the shooting at the time he made
the statement.

(b)

No, the statement may not be considered as a

dying declaration. There was no showing that Lt.
Yap was under the consciousness of his impending
death at the time he made the statement. The
degree or severity of the gunshot wound was not
shown and it took 10 days after the shooting for
Lt, Yap to perish.
(c) No, it may not be admitted as an independently
relevant statement. The statement was being
offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted
therein, that is, that ii was Jose Coman who shot
Lt. Yap, It had no relovance for the prosecution
other than to prove that Jose Comen shot Lt. Yap.
Hence it is hearsay and inadmissible in evidence.

886

Paro! Evidence Rule

0.

Blinded by extreme jealousy, Alberto shot his

wife, Betty, in the presence of his sister, Carla.
Carla brought Betty to the hospital. Outside the
operating room, Carla told Domingo, a male
nurse, that it was Alberto who shot Betty. Betty
died while undergoing emergency surgery. At the
trial of the parricide charges filed against Alberto,
the prosecutor sought to present Domingo as
witness, to testify on what Carla told him. The
defense counsel objected on the ground that
Domingo's testimony is inadmissible for being
hearsay, Rule on the objection with reasons. (09
Bar 013)
A

The objection should be sustained.
Under the Rules of Evidence, hearsay is an outof-court statement offered to prove the truth of the
matter asserted therein and which statement is
inadmissible in evidence.
Here Domingo's testimony related to the out-ofcourt statement of Carla and Which statement was
offered to prove that it was Alberto who shot Betty.
Hence Domingo's testimony is hearsay and is
inadmissible in evidence.
The statement Is not admissible as part of the
res gestae.
Under the res gestae exception to the hearsay
statement must be made while the startling
rule,
occurrence is taking place or immediately prior or
subsequent thereto,

the

Here at the time Carla made the statement to
Domingo, Betty had already been brought to the
hospital and then to the operating room, thereby
indicating the lapse of an appreciable length of time
between the shooting and the making of the
887

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11

statement. Nor was there a showing that Carla was
still under the stress of excitement caused by the
shooting at the time she made the statement to
Domingo. Hence Carla's statement Is not admissible
as part of the res gestas.9
Nor will Carla's statement be admissible as a

dying declaration.
Under the Rules of Evidence, a dying declaration
must be made by the person who died.
Here the statement was made by Carla who was
not the one who died. Hence Carla's statement is not
admissible as a dying declaration.
Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant corporation for damages
after his car collided at night with the Defendant's
dump truck which had been parked askew along
the roadside. Defendant argued that the proximate
cause of the collision was the Plaintiff's speeding.
Defendant presented the testimony of a police
officer who was at the scene of the accident
almost immedlately after It occurred. The police
officer testified that the people who had gathered
at the scene of the accident told him that
Plaintiff's car was "moving fast" and did not have
Its headlights turned on. Plaintiff moved to strike
out the testimony on the ground of hearsay. How
should the court rule on the motion?

A.

The court should deny the motion. The testimony of
the police officer is admissible as part of the res
gestae. Testimonial evidence under this exception to
the hearsay rule consists of excited utterances made

An answer that Carla's statement is admissible under the excited
utterance exception would also be creditable. The question did not indicate the
time which lapsed from the shooting to the making of the statement and thus an
oxamines may not be faulted if he assumes that the time which lapsed was hot
significant

888

Paro! Evidence Rule

on the occasion of an occurrence or event sufficiently
startling in nature so as to render inoperative the
normal reflective thought processes of the observer
and hence made as a spontaneous reaction to the
occurrence or event, and not the result of reflective
thought.
An automobile speeding down a street and
suddenly smashing into a stationary object in the dead
of night is a sufficiently startling event as to evoke
spontaneous, rather than reflective, reactions from
observers who happened to be around at that time.
The police officer's testimony was therefore admissible
as part of the res gestae. (Phoenix Construction, Inc.
v. Dionisio, 10 March 1987)
Q.

Explain the verbal acts exception to the hearsay
rule.

A.

Statements accompanying an equivocal act material
to the issue and giving It a legal significance may
be received in evidence as part of the res gestae.

(S33 R130)

0.

Give an example of a verbal act.

A

Bwas seen handing PS,000 to F B's act of handing
P5,00O to F is an equivocal act for it could be indicative of
a loan, donation, or payment of a pre-existing debt. B
later dies. B's estate sues F to recover the P5,000, F
contends that B donated the money to him. The
estate can present witness W who will testify that he
heard B say, "this is a loan," as he handed the P5,000
to F. B's statement gives legal significance to B's act
of handing the money by characterizing it as a loan
rather than a gift.

889

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Family reputation
Q.

May reputation be introduced in evidence in order
to prove a matter subject of the reputation?

A.

Generally no. The reason is that reputation evidence
is hearsay evidence as the witness is not testifying to
a matter of his personal knowledge but rather as to
the reputation. The persons or people who are the
source of the reputation cannot be cross-examined by
the adverse party.
The exceptions are in the case of family
reputation and common reputation.

Q.

Explain family reputation or tradition regarding
pedigree as an exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

The reputation or tradition existing in a family previous
to the controversy, regarding the pedigree of any one
of its members, may be received in evidence if the
witness testifying thereon be a'so a member of the
family, either by consanguinity or affinity, or by adoption
(S42 R130, as amended by 2020 Rules on Evidence).
Note that the witness must be a member of the

family whose reputation or tradition he is testifying
about and that the reputation or tradition must be
about the pedigree of any one of its members.

0.

Give an example of a statement regarding family
reputation.

A.

Witness W can testify that in their family, the reputation
was that Maria was an adopted child of his parents.

890

Patrol Evidence Rule

Q.

May the family-reputation exception to the
hearsay rule be used to prove age in a statutory
rape case?

A.

Yes. (People v. XXX, 17 July 2019, Lazaro-Javier, J.).

0.

Witness W will testify that in their family, the
reputation was that their brother X was a child
genius. May this be offered in evidence over
objection that it is hearsay?

A.

The reputation cannot come in as family
reputation since it is not about the pedigree of X. Nor
can it come under common reputation since it was
No,

only present in W's family.

0.

A.

Is preliminary and independent evidence of the
witness's family membership required?
No. The witness can rely on his own testimony of

family membership.
Q.

In a filiation case, the petitioner presented a
family book where he is Indicated as a member of
the family. The respondent objected on the ground
that the family book is hearsay since the person
who made the entry was not presented in court
and thus not subject to cross-examination. Should
the objection be sustained?

A.

No, the objection must be overruled, Entries in family
bibles or other family books or charts, engravings on
rings, family portraits and the like, may be received in
evidence without calling to testify the one who made
the entries or engravings. (S42 R130).

891

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Common reputation
0.

ls a statement regarding common reputation
admissible as a hearsay exception?

A.

Yes, provided that the common reputation:
1) Existed previous to the controversy or is ante litem

motam.
2) ls about boundaries of or customs affecting lands
in the community and reputation as to events of

general history important to the community, or
respecting marriage or moral character.
The broad phrase "facts of public or general
interest more than 30 years old" under the former S41
R130 on common reputation was deleted and
replaced with the more particular "boundaries of or
customs affecting lands in the community and

reputation as to events of general history important to
the community." The framers of the 2020 Rules felt
that the phrase facts of public or general interest"
was too vague and that the requirement that the facts
be "more than thirty years old" further restricted the
utility of the exception. The new provisions adopts the
hearsay exception under FRE 803(20).
The common reputation must be one that is
t
"existing_previous to the controversy" or ante liem

motam 91

"Lader FRE 803(20) the ante #item motem requirement does nat apply to
general historical events the reasoning being that the historical character of the
subject matter dispenses with any need that the reputation antedate the
controversy with respect to which it is offered. This approach was not adopted in

the 202 Rules on Evidence.

892

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

Where should the reputation exist?

A.,

S43 R130 speaks of common reputation existing in
the community With respect to reputation to boundaries or
customs affecting lands and with respect to events of
general history. As to reputation regarding marriage
and moral character, it is submitted that the reputation
may be not only among the community but also
among his associates. (FRE 803(191[20]). The reason
is that in modern urban communities, individuals are
more anonymous. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 139 [2004 ed.l).

0.

Wife Tinakwil filed charges of concubinage against
her husband Panibugho and his paramour Kalunya.
May the court allow or give weight to the following
evidence presented by the prosecution over the

vigorous objections of the defense? Explain.
XXX

(d) Testimony of Kuya, Panibugho's brother, who
testified that no man in their family for at least
three generations has been content with only
one woman and that this reputation and
tradition is established in their community.
(86 Bar Qt0d).
A.

(d) The testimony of the brother is not admissible.
The testimony of Kuya will not qualify under the
family reputation exception since the reputation is one
existing In the community rather than the family.
Furthermore, philandering is not embraced within the
term "pedigree." While the testimony may come in
under the common reputation exception, it is objectionable
on the ground that the prosecution cannot introduce
evidence of the accused's bad moral character except
in rebuttal. (S54[a][2] R130)

893

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
Commercial publications

0.

What is the commercial publication exception to
the hearsay rule?

A.

A commercial publication is a list, register, periodical,
or other published compilation containing statements
of matters of interest to persons engaged in an
occupation, published for use by persons engaged in
that occupation, and is generally used and relied upon
by them. (S47 R130)

Q.

What are the requirements of the commercial list
hearsay exception?

A.

The requirements are:
1)

There is a a list, register, periodical, or other
t.ublished compilation

2)

Such published compilation contains statements
of matters of interest to persons engaged in an
occupation.

3) The compilation is published for use by persons
engaged in that occupation.
4) The compilation is generally used and relied
upon by the persons engaged in that occupation.

(PIO PR)
Q.

Give examples of commercial publications as
exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

Examples of such commercial publications are stock
market reports, foreign exchange tables, mortality tables,
actuarial and annuity tables, which are published for
use and relied upon by the persons engaged in the
enterprise or business. Compilations of Amnenican

894

Parol Evidence Rule

cases or laws contained in books published by West
Publishing Company are also examples. Hence they
may be used to prove a foreign case or foreign law.
It is presumed that a printed or published book,
purporting to contain reports of cases adjudged in
tribunals of a foreign country where the book is
published, contains correct reports of such cases.
(s3[hh] R131)
Q.

A PNOC ship collided with private respondent's
fishing ship resulting in the latter ship sinking.
Private Respondent sued PNOC for recovery of
the value of the ship and damages. In order to
prove damages, private respondent offered in
evidence quotation letters from a ship builder and
equipment dealers quoting the price of a fishing
ship, fishing goar and equipment similar to those
lost by Private Respondent. The persons who
wrote the quotation letters were howevnr not
presented by Private Respondent in court.
a) Are the price quotations hearsay?
b)

A.

If so, would they fall under the commercial lists
exception?

a) Yes the price quotations are hearsay. The letters
were out-of-court statements offered to prove the truth
of the valuations made therein.

b)

No, they would not fall under the commercial lists
exception since the letters are not in the nature of
lists, registers, periodicals, or other published
compilations. (PNOC Shipping Corp. v. CA, 297

SCRA 402)

895

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

In a compulsory arbitration case between Meralco
and its union, may the Secretary of Labor take
into account a newspaper report citing an All Asia

Capital financial analyst's estimate of Meralco's

1996 net operating income at P5.8 billion and
upon which the union relied upon in order to
support Its position on the wage issue?
A.

No. Under S47 R130, statement of matters contained
in a periodical may be admitted only "if that
compilation is published for use by persons engaged
in that occupation and is generally used and relied
upon by them therein," The cited report ls a mere
newspaper account and not even a commercial list. At
most, it is but an analysis or opinion which carries no
persuasive weight as no sufficient figures to support it
were presented. Neither did anybody testify to its
accuracy. It cannot be said that businessmen generally
rely on news items such as this in their occupation.
Besides, no evidence was presented that the publication
was regularly prepared by a person in touch with the
market and that it is generally regarded as trustworthy
and reliable. Absent extrinsic proof of their accuracy,
these reports are not admissible. (Manila Electric Co.
v. Quisumbing, 326 SCRA 172)

Q.

Are the stock market quotations or reports in
newspapers admissible in evidence over a hearsay
objection?

A.

Yes. Such stock market quotations or reports are
excepted under the commercial lists exception. (See
Notes of the Advisory Committee to FRE 803[17]). A
newspaper's stock-price listings are published for use
by persons engaged in stock market trading or
investing and are generally relied upon by them. The
pronouncement to the contrary in Manila Electric Co.

896

Paro1 Evidence Rule

v. Quisumbling, 326 SCRA 172,
was merely an
obiter dictum and is not in accord with the majority
position of American courts and legal authorities

0.

Are classified advertisements in the buy-and-sell
section of a newspaper admissible over objection
that these are hearsay?

A.

No. Price offers in classified ads are clearly hearsay.
They cannot be considered as commercial lists since
they are essentially separate and distinct offers to buy
or sell and not a published compilation containing
commercial information

Official records
Q.

What is the official records exception to the
hearsay rule?

A.

Entries in official records made in the performance of
his duty by a public officer of the Philippines, or by a
person in the performance of a duty specially enjoined
by law are excepted from the hearsay rule. (S46
RR130). Not only are the official entries exceptod from
the hearsay rule, they are also considered as prima
facie evidence of the facts therein stated. (Id.)

O.

What are the requirements of the official entries
exception?

A.

The requirements are: (K POP)
1) The entries must have been made in official

records.

re Quisumbing case Involved a newspaper report of a financial
analyst's estimate of Meralco's 1996 net operating income. The report was
clearly hearsay

897

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
2)

The entry must have been made by a public officer
of the Philippines in the performance of his duty
or by a person in the performance of a duty
specially enjoined by law.

3) The entrant must have personal knowledge of the
facts stated by him or such facts were acquired
by him from reports made by persons under a
legal duty to submit the same.
Q.

X was charged with robbery. On the strength of a
warrant of arrest issued by the court, X was
arrested by police operatives. They seized from
his person a handgun, A charge for illegal
possession of firearms was also filed against him.
In a press conference called by the police, X
admitted that he had robbed the victim of jewelry

valued at P500,000.00.
The robbery and Illegal possession of firearm
cases were tried jointly. The prosecution presented
in evidence a newspaper clipping of the report by
the reporter who was present during the press
conference stating that X admitted the robbery. It
likewise presented a certification of the PNP
Firearms and Explosives Office attesting that the
accused had no license to carry any firearm. Tho
certifying officer, however, was not presented as
a witness. Both pieces of evidence were objected
to by the defense.

(a) xxx
(b) ls the certification of the PNP Firearm and
Explosives Office without the certifying officer
testifying on it admissible in evidence against
Xx? (03 Bar Q18).

898

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

(b) Yes the PNP certification is admissible in evidence
against X.
Under the Rules on Evidence, excepted from the
hearsay rule are entries in official records made in the
performance of his duty by a public officer. There is
no requirement that the entrant is dead or unavailable
to testify. ($46 R130)
The PNP certification is an official record which
is excepted from the hearsay rule and thus admissible
in evidence even without accounting for the nonpresentation of the entrant.

Q.

Prosecution of Accused for Illegal Recruitment.
The Prosecution presented a POEA Certification,
issued by the Director of its Licensing Branch,
that the Accused is neither licensed nor authorized
by the POEA to recruit workers for overseas
employment. The Accused objects to the offer on
the ground that the Director was not presented in
court to testify thereon and thus the certification
is hearsay, Should the objection be sustained?

A.

No. One of the exceptions to the hearsay rule are
entries in official records made in the performance of
duty by a public officer.In other words, official entries
are admissible in evidence regardless of whether the
officer or person who made them was presented and
testified in court, since these entries are considered prime
facie evidence of the facts stated therein. (People v.
Ochoa, 31 August 2011, Leonardo-De Castro, J,).°

re SC noted thot a witress had identified the signature of the certifying
officer It is opined that even If the certifying officer's signature was not iderited,
the certification would still be admissible as it is a public document under S19(a)
R132 which does not need to be authenticated.

899

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In a rape case, may a medico-legal report stating
that AAA had sexual intercourse with the accused
and that AAA was seven weeks pregnant be
introduced in evidence against the accused without
presenting the doctor who executed it?

A.

Yes. Dr. Baluyut's issuance of the medico-legal report
falls under one of the exceptions to the hearsay rule.
Under S46 R130, "[ejntries in official records made in

the performance of [her] duty [as] a public officer of
the Philippines, x x x are prima facie evidence of the
facts therein stated." Dr Baluyut, a government doctor,
and who by actual practice and by virtue of her oath
as civil service official, is competent to examine
persons and issue medico-legal reports. (People v.
Tuyor, 12 October 2020, Peralta, C,J.)
Q.

Pedro filed a petition for relief from the Judgment
of the RTC in Pam's favor, Pedro contends that
the judgment was null and void because the
sheriff did not exert diligent efforts to effect
personal service before resorting to substituted
service. Pam presented in evidence the sheriff's
return wherein it was stated that the sheriff
exerted diligent efforts to effect personal service
before resorting to substituted service. Pam
however did not present the sheriff who made the
return nor did she explain why she failed to
present the sheriff. Pedro objected to the offer of
the sheriffs return on the ground that It was
hearsay. Pedro argued that Pam should have
presented the sheriff so that he could have been
cross-examined by Pedro. How should the court
rule on the objection?

A.

The court should overrule the objection.

900

Parol Evidence Rule

Under the Rules on Evidence, entries in official
records made by a public officer in the performance of
a duty are excepted from the hearsay rule and there
is no requirement that the entrant be dead or unable
to testify.
Here the sheriff is a public cfficer and he made

the entries in the return in the performance of duty.
Hence the return ls excepted from the hearsay rule
even if the sheriff was not presented in court.
Q

If the entry ls made by a public officer of a foreign
country in the performance of his duty, is the
same excepted from the hearsay rule?

A.

While the text of S46 R130 would appear to indicate
that such entry is not excepted from the hearsay rule,
it is submitted that it is so excepted taking into
account S19(a) and S23 of R130. S19(a) classifies as
public documents the written official acts or records of
the acts of public officers, whether of the Philippines
or of a foreign country. S23, captioned "[p]ublic documents
as evidence," provides that documents consisting of
entries in public records made in the performance of a
duty by a public officer are prima facie evidence of the
facts therein stated. FRE 803(8) also treats public
records as an exception to the hearsay rule

0.

ls a return of service of summons executed by a
foreign sheriff admissible to prove the fact of
service even without presenting In court the
foreign sheriff?

A

It is submitted that the return of service is admissible
to prove the fact of service even without presenting
the foreign sheriff.

901

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Although $44 R130 refers to "[e]tries in official
records made in the performance of his duty by a
public officer of the Philippies"
n (italics supplied), this
provision should be read in conjunction with S19(a)
R132 and S23 R132. S19(a) R132 classifies as public
documents, the written official acts of public officers,
whether of the Philippines or of a foreign country.
Under $23 R132, "[d]ocuments consisting of entries In
public records made in the performance of a duty by a

public officer are prima facie evidence of the facts
therein stated."
Hence the return of service may be presented as
prima facio evidence of the fact of service even
without presenting the foreign sheriff. The requirements
of proof of official record under S24 R132 must of
course be followed.
Q.

Give examples of private persons
enjoined by law to make official entries.

specially

A.

(1) Log book entries required to be kept by a ship
captain regarding the incidents of navigation (Article
612, Code of Commerce; Haverton Shipping Ltd. v.
NLRC, 15 April 1985); (2) Stamp of dishonor and Its
reason required from the drawee of a check under
B.P. Blg. 22; and (3) Parties to a marriage ceremony
and the solemnizing officer are required to sign and

attest the marriage certificate and the solemnizing officer
ls required to keep a copy.(Art. 23, Family Code).
Q

W, claiming to be H's wife, filed a motion to
intervene in the settlement of H's estate. The
administrator resists the motion on his allegation
that H was never married, May the administrator
Introduce, over a hearsay objection, H's Income
tax return for the past five years wherein H stated
that he was single?

902

Parol Evidence Rule

A.

Yes. H's income tax return is excepted from hearsay
rule as an official record, having been made by a
person specially enjoined by law to do so.

Q.

Is a certified true copy of the Monthly Report dated
January 1985 of then Judge Rosallo A. De Leon,
attesting to the fact that petitioner was convicted
of the crime of Robbery with Homicide on 11
January 1985, an exception to the hearsay rule?

A,

Yes. Such Monthly Report constitutes an entry in
official records under S46 R130, which is prima facie
evidence of facts therein stated. (Feria v. Court of
Appeals, G.R. No. 122954, 15 February 2000).

Q.

Fire gutted a Caltex gasoline station. The flames
leapt over Caltex' fence and ongulfed several
neighboring homes. After the fire, a police
investigator went to the premises. He wrote down
in his report that many people passed by the
gasoline station. He also wrote that he interviewed a
bystander who told him that he (the bystander)
saw a person throw a lighted cigarette near the
gasoline tanks and that this started the fire. ls the
police investigation report admissible to prove the
facts stated therein without presenting the police
investigator?

A.

As to the fact that many people passed by the
gasoline station, the police investigation report is
admissible to prove this since the police investigation
report is an official entry.
However as to the fact that the fire was started
by someone throwing a lighted cigarette, the police
investigation report was hearsay. This is because the
police investigator did not personally perceive this
fact. (Africa v. Caltex, 16 SCRA 448)

903

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Respondent Corporation filed a complaint for
damages for P200,000 against Petitioner before
the MTC. Since the case was governed by the

Rule on Summary Procedure, the Respondent
submitted its affidavit and a Traffic Accident
Investigation Report (TAIR) prepared by PO2
Tomas In which P02 Tomas stated that a certain
Simbahon informed him that it was Petitioner's
vehicle which rammed from behind Respondent's
vehicle. Neither the affidavit of Tomas nor of
Simbahon were presented in evidence. The MTC,
RTC, and the CA stated that the TAIR was
properly considered in finding the Petitioner llable
to the Respondent stating that as an official
record, It Is an exception to the hearsay rule.
Were the lowor courts correct?

A.

No. The TAIR is hearsay. It does not qualify as an
official record exception to the hearsay rule since PO2
Tomas did not have personal knowledge of the cause
of the accident. In fact, even if the affidavit of PO2
Tomas were presented in evidence, it would still be
insufficient to establish that it was the Petitioner who
caused the accident. For that purpose, the affidavit of
Simbahon was necessary. (DST Movers Corp. v.
People's General Insurance Corp., 13 January 2016,
Leanen, J.).

Q.

The BIR issued a warrant of distraint and levy
against the petitioner for deficiency income tax.
The Petitloner raised the defense of prescription,
arguing that the BIR's right to assess had
prescribed. The BIR contended that it had sent a
formal assessment notice to the Petitioner. As
evidence, the BIR offered in evidence before the
CTA a BIR record book containing the taxpayer's
name, the tax assessed, the registry receipt number,
and the date of mailing, which was offered to

904

Paro! Evidence Rule

prove that the Petitioner had received the
assessment notice, The records custodian also
testified that she was the one who made the
entries in the record book. However she did not
attest that she was the one who personally
prepared and mailed the assessment notice nor
did she attest that the information in the entries
were supplied by persons having a specific legal
duty to do so, Were the entries in the BIR record
book an exception to the hearsay rule?
A.

No. In Africa v. Caltex, 16 SCRA 448, it has been
held that under S46 R130 the entrant must have
personal knowledge of the facts state by him or such
facts were acquired by him from reports made by
persons under a legal duty to submit the same. Here
the BIR records custodian who made the entries
thereon did not have personal knowledge thereof since
she did not attest that she was the one who personally
prepared and mailed the assessment notice nor did
she attest that the information in the entries were
supplied by persons having a specific legal duty to do
so, 1t was not stated ln the TSN how and from whom
she obtained the pertinent information. Hence S44
R130 is inapplicable. (Barcelon, Roxas Securities Inc.
v. Comm. of Internal Revenue, G.R. 157064, 7
August 2006)

Learned treatises

0.

Glve the requisites of the learned treatise exception
to the hearsay rule.

A.

The requisites of the learned treatise exception are:
(PLR)

905

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

1) There is a

published treatise, periodical or

pamphlet.

2) It is on the subject of law art science or history
(LASH)

3) The writer of the statement in the treatise,
periodical, or pamphlet is reconized in his
profession or calling as expert in the subject.
Such recognition may be proved by an expert
witness or taken judicial notice of by the court.
(S48 R130).
Q.

ls an article on the web by an expert covered by
this exception?

A.

It is submitted that it is not so covered, "Published"
here refers to one done by publishing houses and
Intended for sale or distribution to the public. Such
publication, with the safeguards of editorial and peer
review, assures quality and authoritativeness of the
treatise, periodical, or pamphlet and guards against
inferior or mediocre material. Such safeguards are
not present in the internet where almost anybody can
post an article and represent himself to be an expert.

Q.

ls an English translation of the Japanese Civil

Code exempted from the hearsay rule as a learned
treatise?
A.

No. The RTC did not take judicial notice of the
translator's and advisors' qualifications. Nor was an
expert witness presented to testify on this matter. The
only evidence of the translator's and advisors'
credentials is the inside cover page of the English
translation of the Civil Code.

906

Parol Evidence Rule

Nor may It be considered an official publication
since the translation was published by a private
Japanese company. (Arreza v, Toyo, 1 July 2019,

Leonen, J.).
Residual exception
Q.

What is the residual exception to the hearsay rule.

A.

Aside from specific exceptions to the hearsay rule, the
residual exception allows for a broad exemption for
statements "having equivalent circumstantial guarantees
of trustworthiness." The residual exception provided
for a compromise between those advocating the
abandonment of the hearsay rule to those pushing for
ts retention, The residual exception was eventually
incorporated to the FRE as R8O7. The residual exception
was adopted in the 2020 Rules on Evidence as S50
R130 which reads as follows:
"Sec. 50. Residual exception, - A statement not
specifically covered by any of the foregoing
exceptions, having equivalent circumstantial guarantees of
trustworthiness, is admissible if the court determines
that (a) the statement is offered as evidence of a
material fact; (b) the statement is more probative on
the point for which it is offered than any other
evidence which the proponent can procure through
reasonable efforts; and (c) the general purposes of
these rules and the interests of justice will be best
served by admission of the statement into evidence
However, a statement may not be admitted under this
exception unless the proponent makes known ta the
adverse party, sufficiently in advance of the hearing,
or by the pre-trial stage in the case of a trial of the main
case, to provide the adverse party with a fair opportunity

907

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
to prepare to meet it, the proponent's intention to offer
the statement and the particulars of it, including the
name and address of the declarant4
Q.

The clock tower of the Dallas County courthouse
had collapsed five days after a thunderstorm in
1957. Dallas County requested for its Insurer,

Commercial Union Assurance Company, to cover
the damage resulting from the collapse of the
Dallas County Courthouse clock tower. Several

witnesses

testified

that lightning

struck the

building during the storm. The county used the
existence of charred timbers in the wreckage to
corroborate the eyewitness accounts. The Insurance
company, however, denied that lightning charred
the timbers, contending instead that the damage
occurred during a previous fire. The company

offered, and the trial court admitted, an unsigned
newspaper article dated 9 June 1901 which
reported a blaze in the courthouse. The article did
not come within an established exception to the
hearsay rule. Was it proper for the trial court to
admit the newspaper article?
A.

Yes, under the residual exception to the hearsay rule,

The court admitted the report solely on grounds of
necessity and trustworthiness. It recognized that the
article was needed because the memory of any
witness to the fire would not have been as reliable as
re adoption of the residual exception is a laudable move which serves
to temper the hearsay rule by giving leeway to the trial fudge to admit trustworthy
hearsay.It is to be noted however that FRE BT was amended in 1 December
201g in order to address prolems encountered in practice The 2019 arnendrent did
away with the equivalence standard by replacing 'equivalent circumstantial
guarantees of trustworthiness with "sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness.
Also while the prior rule required notice before trial of one's intent to introduce
hearsay evidence under the residual exception, the new rule also permits giving
notice during trial, if the court determines that the lack of eartier notipe should be
excused for good cause tt is respectfully suggested that the 2020 Rules of
Evidence adopt the f December 2019 amendment of FRE B07

908

Parol Evidence Rule

the newspaper account. The court reasoned that the
article was the only evidence available to prove the
Insurer's claim and it came from an inherently reliable
source. The court concluded that the article was
trustworthy since it was inconceivable that a small
town reporter would fabricate the story. (Dallas
County v. Commercial Union Assurance Co., 286
F.2d 388 [5 Cir. 1961))
Q.

Describe the hearsay exception in child abuse

cases.
A.

A child's statement describing an act or attempted act
of child abuse is excepted from the hearsay rule. The
proponent shall make known to the adverse party the
intention to offer such statement and Its particulars to
provide him a fair opportunity to object.
If the child is available, the court, upon motion of
the adverse party, shall require the child to be present
at the hearsay statement for cross-examination by the
adverse party.
If the child is unavailable, the proponent must
prove such unavailability. The statement shall be
admitted only if corroborated by other admissible
evidence. "Unavailable" includes cases where the
child is suffering from physical infirmity, lack
memory, mental illness, or will be exposed to severe
psychological injury. (Section 28, RECW).

of

A child witness is any person who at the time of
giving testimony is below 18 years. In child abuse
cases, a child includes one over 18 years but is found
by the court as unable to fully take care of himself or
protect himself from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation,
or discrimination because of a physical or mental
disability or condition, (Section 4[a], RECW).

909

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
The hearsay exception under Section 28(a)
refers to two situations. The first is when the childdeclarant is unavailable to testify The second is when
the child-declarant is available to testify and subject to

cross-examination concerning the statement. The
second situation is similar to the hearsay exclusion for

prior consistent statements of a declarant-witness
under Section 37(b) of Rule 130

It is to be noted that the child-witness's prior
statements may be introduced as substantive
evidence even without the need of rebutting a charge

of fabrication or improper motive or of rehabilitating
the witness. However Section 28(a) does require that
the proponent give advance notice to the opponent in

order to provide him with a fair opportunity to object
Q.

A.

What are the factors that the court shall consider
in ruling on the admissibility of the child's statement?
In

ruling

on the

admissibility of such hearsay

statement, the court shall consider the time, content
and circumstances thereof which provide sufficient
indicia of reliability. It shall consider the following
factors: (LCM SFC MT)

(1) Whether there is a motive to lie.
(2) The general character of the child declarant.

(3) Whether more than one person heard the
statement.
(4) Whether the statement was spontaneous.
(5) The timing of the statement and the relationship
between the child declarant and witness.
(6) Cross-examination could not show the lack of
knowledge of the child declarant.

910

Parol Evidence Rule

(7)

The possibility of faulty recollection of the child
declarant is remote.

(8) The circumstances surrounding the statement are
such that there is no reason to suppose the child
declarant misrepresented the Involvement of the
accused.

Multiple (double) hearsay
Q.

What is double or multiple hearsay

A.

Double or multiple hearsay occurs when a hearsay
declaration is embedded In another with the result
that there are two or more levels of hearsay. This
frequently happens where a party seeks to introduce
a written report by a declarant (first level) of another

declarant's out-of-court statement (second level). Under
FRE 805, hearsay included within hearsay is not excluded
under the hearsay rule if each level of hearsay
conforms with an exception to the hearsay rule.
Q.

D1 was mortally injured. Conscious of his impending
death, D1 was interviewed by a police officer D2.
01 told 02 that X stabbed him several times. D2
wrote what D1 said in his police investigation
report. In the prosecution of X for murder, may the
prosecution present the police investigation to
prove that X stabbed D1 without presenting D2?

A.

Yes. Each level of hearsay conforms with an exception
to the hearsay rule. The first level is justified by the
official records exception while the second 'evel is
justified by the dying declarations exception. If the
one who wrote down what D1 said was a private
person who later became unavailable to testify, the
writing would be inadmissible as the first level is not
supported by a hearsay exception.

911

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

D1 was found mortally injured by a security
officer in a lobby of a hotel. Conscious of his
impending death, D1 was interviewed by the
hotel's security officer D2 and 01 told 02 that X
stabbed him several times. D2 wrote what D1 said
in his log book. In the prosecution of X for murder,
may the prosecution present the log book to
prove that X stabbed D1 without presenting D2?

A.

Yes. Each level of hearsay conforms with an exception
to the hearsay rule The first level is justified by the
business records exception while the second level is
justified by the dying declarations exception. Note that
under the 2020 Rules on Evidence, the entrant's
unavailability to testify is no longer required for the
business records exception.

Q.

Pedro was run down and Injured by a Ferrari
sports car that did not stop after the accident.
The Fiscal believes that Jose was the one driving
the hit-and-run car and is preparing to prosecute
him. Pedro tells the Fiscal that his (Pedro's)
cousin, Atty. Cruz had given him {Pedro) the
following Information:
a) that Jose, accompanied by his socialite wife,
consulted him (Atty. Cruz) at his home an
hour after the accident;

b) that Jose told Atty. Cruz that "I ran Into
someone who was seriously injured with my
sports car";

c)

that Jose's wife had said, "We should have
stopped as soon as we hit him";

d)

that Atty, Cruz advised Jose, "In any event,
keep your car In the garage until we can find
out all the facts".
912

Paro! Evidence Rule

The Fiscal seeks to use the foregoing evidence.
May he do so? Discuss. (78 Bar 09b).
A.

The Fiscal may not use the foregoing evidence over
the proper objection of Jose.
The facts indicate two levels of hearsay or out-ofcourt statements, that is, the statements of Atty. Cruz
and the statements of Jose and his wife. In order to
determine whether the testimony of Pedro is
admissible, we have to determine the admissibility of
each level of hearsay/out-of-court statement. While
the statements of Jose are excluded from the hearsay
rule on the ground that they are party-admissions, the
statements of Atty. Cruz are not justified by any
hearsay exception or exclusion.
Hence the testimony of Pedro would be objected
to on the ground that it is hearsay. Atty. Cruz himself
may not be presented as a witness in court over the
objection that his testimony would violate the
attorney-client privilege."°
Nor may Jose's socialite wife be presented as a
witness over an objection invoking the marital
disqualification rule.

Q.

Romeo is sued for damages for injuries suffered
by the plaintiff in a vehicular accident. Julieta, a
witness In court, testifies that Romeo told her
(Julieta) that he (Romeo) heard Antonio, a witness
to the accident, glve an excited account of the
accident immediatoly after its occurrence. ls Julieta's
testimony admissible against Romeo over proper
and timely objection? (02 Bar Q12)

re

UP Law Center Committee recommends that Jose's statement may
be admissible as part of the res gestae exception to the hearsay rule This
answer overlooks that there is another level of hearsay, the statemert of Atty
Cruz, which ls not covered by any hearsay exception or exclusion.

913

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

Yes, Julieta's testimony is admissible even over the
relevant objection that it is testimony on hearsay.
An analysis of the problem reveals that there are
two out-of-court statements, that of Romeo and that of
Antonio. Romeo's statement is not covered by the
hearsay rule since it is an admission, Romeo being

the defendant. Antonio's statement is excepted from
the hearsay rule since it is an excited utterance.
Since each level of the out-of-court declaration is
justified by a hearsay exception or exclusion, Julieta's
testimony is admissible against Romeo."°

Lack ofpersonal knowledge distiguished
from hearsay
n
0.

Distinguish lack of personal knowledge from
hearsay.

A.

Lack of personal knowledge is when a witness is
testifying on facts which he does not know of his
personal knowledge or which are not derived from his
own perception. (See $22 R130). It is also known as
"lack of firsthand knowledge." It is distinguished from
hearsay in that the witness is not reporting or
introducing an out-of-court statement.
To illustrate: Prosecution presents W who
testifies that the accused shot the victim. The record
shows that W was in the U.S. at the time of the
shooting, which happened in Davao City. Defense can
object on the ground of lack of personal knowledge, not
hearsay. It !s not hearsay since Wis not reporting or
introducing an out-of-court statement.

e suggested answer of the UP Law Center, which states that
Julieta s testimony is on hearsay, overlooks the
that Romeo is the defendant
himself and thus ns statement is excluded from the hearsay rule s.voe if is 8

act

party-admission

914

Parol Evidence Rule

If on the other hand, W testifies that David told
him that the accused shot the victim, the proper objection
is not lack of personal knowledge but hearsay.
(RICHARD LEMPERT 8 STEPHEN SALTZBURG, A
MODERN APPROACH TO EVIDENCE 369 [2d ed.,
1982; 3d reprint, 1988]; FRE 602, advisory committee
note)
Opinion Rule
Q.

ls the opinion of a witness admissible in evidence?

A.

The opinion of a witness is not admissible in evidence
subject to certain exceptions.

Q.

What are the exceptions to the rule that the
opinion of a witness is not admissible in evidence,

A.

The exceptions are: (1) expert opinion; and (2) lay
opinion on handwriting, identity, and sanity; (3) shorthand impressions on condition, appearance, behavior,
and emotion; and (4) witness's opinion on character in
cases where character evidence is admissible. (S54
R130). (SLEC)

Q.

What is expert opinion?

A,

The opinion of a witness on a matter requiring special
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education
(special TEKES) which he is shown to possess. The
expert opinion may be received in evidence.

0.

ls it necessary that the expert witness have formal
training or instruction on his fiold of expertise?

A.

No, what is important is that he has special knowledge,
skill, experience or training.

915

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW

VOLUME II
Q.

What step should be taken before an export
witness is allowed to testify?

A.

Unlike an ordinary witness, the expert witness should
Qualification is made by showing that the witness

possesses special knowledge, skill, experience or
training. The lack of qualification should be timely raised
by the adverse party before the witness is presented
to testify; otherwise the objection is deemed waived.
0.

May an expert witness testify based on hypothetical

or assumed facts?
A.

Yes. Unlike the ordinary witness, the expert witness
may testify based on hypothetical or assumed facts.
Thus a clinical psychologist can testify regarding the
psychological capacity of a person even if she was

not able to personally interview the witness.
0.

The petitioner filed a petition for declaration of
nullity of marriage based allegedly on the
psychological incapacity of the respondent, but
the psychologist was not able to personally
examine the respondent and the psychological
report was based only on the narration of petitioner.
Should the annulment be granted? (12 Civil Bar
Essay-Type Q2b).

A.

No. The psychologist was not able to personally
examine the respondent and the psychological report
was based only on the narration of the petitioner
whose bias in favor of her cause cannot be doubted
Hence the psychologist's report and testimony were
hearsay since she had no personal knowledge of the
alleged facts he was testifying on. (Paz v. Paz, 18
February 2010).'

owever, the psychologist's testimony and report were held to be not
hearsay if they were based not solely on the psychologist's interview of the

916

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

Plaintiff Dr. dela Llana, a surgeon, sued Defendant
for damages arising from the incident wherein
Defendant's driver negligently bumped Plaintiff's
car, Plaintiff claimed that she suffered a whiplash
injury arising from the collision which led to her
being Incapacitated to practice medicine. At the
trial, Dr. dela Llana presented herself as an
ordinary witness. Dr. dela Llana testified that she
lost the mobility of her arm because of the
vehicular accident. Does Dr. dela Llana's opinion
have probative value?

A.

No. Despite the fact that Dr. dela Llana is a physician
and even assuming that she is an expert in neurology,
we cannot give weight to her opinion that the driver's
reckless driving caused her whiplash injury without
violating the rules on evidence. The reason was that
she was not presented as an expert witness. As an
ordinary witness, she was not competent to testify on
the nature, and the cause and effects of whiplash injury.
(Dela Llana v. Biong, 4 December 2013, Brion, J.)

Q.

Give the rule regarding the admissibility of a report
by a government medical, chemical, or laboratory
expert.

A.

A certified copy of the report of a government medical,
chemical, or laboratory expert (mcle) relating to a criminal
case shall be admissible as prima facie evidence of
the truth of its contents, The personal appearance in
court of a witness who prepared the report shall be
unnecessary unless demanded by the accused for the
purpose of cross-examination. (Sec. 13, A.M. No. 1211-2-SC, eff. 1 May 2014). It appears that this provision
which is found in A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC applies only to
criminal cases involving detained accused.

petitioner but of other persons, such as the respondent's own son, siblings, and
his sister-in-law (petitioner's sister) (Camacho-Reyes v. Reyes, 18 August 2010)

917

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

When is the opinion of an ordinary witness
admissible in evidence?

A.

The opinion of a witness for which proper basis Is
given, may be received in evidence regarding; (HIS)
(a) The identity of a person about whom he has
adequate knowledge.

(b) A handwriting with which he has sufficient
familiarity.

(c) The mental sanity of a person with whom he is
sufficiently acquainted.

The witness may also testify on his impressions
of the condition, appearance, behavior, or emotion of

a person (CABE). This is also known as short-hand
opinions or impressions. (S53 R130).
Witnesses can also give opinions or estimates
regarding physical dimensions (e.g., length, height,
weight), speed, and lighting conditions."°
O.

ls an ordinary witness' impression on similarity of
signatures admissible in evidence?

A.

Yes, provided his familiarity with the handwriting of
the signer is shown. Otherwise, such impression
would be inadmissible opinion. (Co v. People, 16
October 2019, Bersamin, C.J.).

0.

Dencio barged into the house of Marcela, tied her
to a chair and robbed her of assorted pieces of
jewelry and money. Dencio then brought Candida,
Marcela's maid, to a bedroom where he raped her,
Marcela could hear Candida crying and pleading:
"Huwag! Maawa ka sa akin!" After raping Candida,

CARDO L PRONOVE, JR EVIDENCE IN ACTION 12 (1996)

918

Parol Evidence Rule

Dencio fled from the house with the loot. Candida
then untied Marcela and rushed to the police
station about a kilometer away and told Police
Officer Roberto Maawa that Denclo had barged
into the house of Marcela, tied the latter to a chair
and robbed her of her jewelry and money.
Candida also related to the police officer that
despite her pleas, Denclo had raped her. The
policeman noticed that Candida was hysterical
and on the verge of collapse. Dencio was charged
with robbery with rape. During the trial, Candida
can no longer be located.
a) xxx

b) If the police officer will testify that he noticed
Candida to be hysterical and on the verge of
collapse, would such testimony be considered
as opinion, hence, Inadmissible? Explain, (05
Bar 016b).
A.

b) Yes, the police officer's testimony that he noticed
Candida to be hysterical and on the verge of collapse
is opinion but admissible as an exception to the
opinion rule.

Under the Rules of Evidence, a witness' impressions
of the condition, emotion, appearance, and behavior
of a person is an exception to the opinion rule and
thus admissible in evidence.
Here the police officer's testimony that Candida
is hysterical and on the verge of collapse is his
impression of her condition, emotion, appearance,
and behavior.

919

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Q.

Plaintiff sued Defendant corporation for damages
after his car collided at night with the Defendant's
dump truck which had been parked askew along
the roadside. Defendant argued that the proximate
cause of the collision was the Plaintiff's speeding.
Defendant presented the testimony of a police
officer who was at the scene of the accident
almost immediately after it occurred. The police
officer testified that the people who had gathered
at the scene of the accident told him that
Plaintiff's car was "moving fast." Plaintiff moved
to strike out the testimony on the ground that it
related to inadmissible opinion. How should the
court rule on the motion?

A,

The court should deny the motion. It is well-settled in
the Law on Evidence that a witness's opinion or
estimate of speed or velocity is admissible in evidence.
Clearly, substantial weight should have been ascribed
to such testimony, even though it did not, as it could
not, have purported to describe quantitatively the
precise velocity at which Plaintiff was travelling just

before impact with the dump truck. (See Phoenix
Construction, Inc. v. Dionisio, 10 March 1987)
Character Evidence
0.

Distinguish between character and reputation.

A.

Character is what you are, reputation is what the
community knows you are. Reputation is used to prove
character. Note that family reputation and common
reputation are excepted from the hearsay rule. (S42 &

43 R130)

920

Parol Evidence Rule

0.

Is character evidence admissible?

A.

The general rule is that character evidence is not
admissible. The reason is that it is irrelevant. A case
should be decided based on the facts and the law, not
on the character of the parties. The court should try
the case, not the man. (Pp v Lee, 29 May 2002).

The $54 R130 of the 2020 Rules on Evidence puts it
in a more precise formulation: "Evidence of a person's
character or a trait of character is not admissible for
the purpose of proving action in conformity therewith
on a particular occasion." This means that character
cannot be used as circumstantial evidence.
Q.

What are the uses of character evidence?

A.

The uses of character evidence are as follows: (CRID)

1) AS CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE, that is, that a
person acted in conformity with his character.

(S54 R130).
2) AS DIRECT EVIDENCE of character. where
character itself is the fact in issue.

3) TO IMPEACH the adverse party's witness (S11
R132)
4)

TO REHABILITATE a Witness whose character
has been impeached. (S54[c] R130)

Nos. 3 and 4 are actually subsumed in No. 1. In
such cases, the purpose is to show that the witness
acted in conformity with a character for untruthfulness
or truthfulness.

921

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Give the rule regarding character evidence in

civil cases:
A.

In civil cases, evidence of moral character of a party
is admissible only when pertinent to the issue of
character involved in a case. (S54[b] R130),
The fact in issue involved must be character
itself. Hence character cannot be used as circumstantial
evidence in a civil case.

0.

Give the civil cases where character is directly
in issue.

A.

The following are the civil cases where character is
directly in issue
1)

In civil actions for libel or slander, where the
character of the aggrieved person is a fact in
issue that may be proved by both plaintiff and
defendant.

2) in actions for seduction, where the woman seduced
must be of chaste reputation. (2 FLORENZ D.
REGALADO 668 [9° rev. ed.]: ANTONIO R.
BAUSTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 137 [2007 ead.))
3)

In child custody cases, where the character of
fitness of the parents or guardians is a fact-inissue and an element of a claim or defense.

4)

In a legal separation case grounded on sexual
infidelity, the faithfulness of the spouse is directly
in issue; hence reputation evidence of his or her
unchaste character would be admissible.

922

arol Evidence Rule

Q.

A.

Owner sued contractor for damages for using
substandard materials despite their agreement to
use high-quality materials. May contractor present
a witness to testify on his honest reputation?
No. The contractor's character is not a fact in issue in

the suit for damages. Here character evidence is being
used merely as circumstantial evidence that contractor
would not have deceived owner as he is of honest
character but it did not go directly to the issue of whether
the contractor violated the terms of the agreement.

Q.

Action for damages against bus company by
plaintiff who was injured by the recklessness of
the bus driver. The plaintiff seeks to introduce
evidence that the driver had a reputation for being
a reckless driver. May the court admit the evidence
over objection that it is irrelevant character evidence?

A.

Yes. This is a case of negligent hiring. The evidence
was competent upon the question of the bus
company's vicarious negligence under Article 2180,
particularly in hiring or continuing in its hire the driver
despite his reputation for being a reckless driver.

0.

Give the rule regarding character evidence in
criminal cases.

A,

Accused in criminal case

The accused may prove his good moral character
if pertinent to the moral trait involved in the offense

charged.
For instance, in a charge for estata, the accused
may prove his good moral character. However in a
charge for failing to register securities before offering
them for sale, there is no moral trait involved

923

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
The prosecution may not prove the accused's
bad moral character unless the defense opens the
door for rebuttal by introducing evidence of the accused's
good moral character (S54[a][2] R130).

Offended party in criminal case
Evidence of the good or bad moral character of
the offended party is admissible if it tends to establish
the probability or improbability of the offense charged.
(S54[a](1] R130).

Thus evidence of the violent character of the
victim is relevant to prove self-defense by the accused.
Evidence of his peaceable character can be adduced
by the prosecution to show the accused's guilt.
Q.

Give the rule on character evidence regarding
witnesses.

Adverse party's witness

The adverse party may introduce evidence that a
witness's genera reputation for honesty, integrity, or
truth is bad for purposes of Impeaching the witness.
The witness may not be impeached by evidence of
partlcular wrongful acts. except that it may be shown
by the examination of the witness, or record of the
judgment, that he has been convicted of an offense.
(S11 R132)

Party's witness
If the good character of a witness has been
impeached, the party presenting the witness may
rehabilitate his witness by presenting evidence of his
good character, (S54[c] R130). A party cannot present
evidence of the good moral character of his witness if
the same has not been impeached. (Id.).
924

Parol Evidence Rule

Q.

The accused was charged with murder. The
accused raised the defense of denial and alibi.
The accused testified that victim was a drug
addict and thief and presented a letter from the
victim's mother to Mayor Malonzo surrendering
her son because he was a drug addict and a thief.
The accused contended that the victim could have
been killed by any one of those from whom he
had stolen. The prosecution objected on the
ground that such evidence is irrelevant. Should
the objection be sustained?

A.

Yes. Proof of the bad moral character of the victim is
irrelevant to establish the probability or improbability
of his killing since the accused did not allege that the
victim was the aggressor or that the killing was
made in self-defense. (Pp v. Lee, G.R. NO. 139070,
29 May 2002)

Q.

Wife Tinakwit filed charges of concubinage against
her husband Panibugho and his paramour Kalunya.
May the court allow or give weight to the following
evidence presented by the prosecution over the
vigorous objection of the accused? Give reasons.
XXX

(d) Testimony of Kuya, Panibugho's brother, who
testified that no man in their family for at least
three generations has been content with only
one woman and that this reputation and
tradition is established in their community.
(86 Bar Q10d).

A.

The court should not allow or give weight to the
testimony of Kuya.

925

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME 11
Under the Rules of Evidence, evidence as to the
bad character of the accused cannot be proved by the
prosecution unless In rebuttal. {S54{a](2) R130]
Here the reputation evidence tends to prove the
bad moral character of the accused by showing that
he is a philanderer. Hence the same is inadmissible.

Note: An objection based on hearsay would
have been overruled since common reputation is an
exception to the hearsay rule. The proper objection is
that under S54[a)[2] R130.
Q.

How is character proved?

A,

Character is proved by: (1) re:utation evidence, (2)
the witness's ppinion, or (3) specific instances pf
conduct. (ROS)

Reputation evidence
In all cases in which evidence of character or a
trait of character of a person is admissible, proof may
be made by testimony as to reputation or by
testimony in the form of an opinion

Evidence of common reputation is the standard
method of proving character. Under S43 R130 common
reputation is admissible to prove moral character.
Under S11 R132 a witness's general reputation for
honesty, integrity, or truth may be impeached by
reputation evidence.
Reputation regarding moral character is that
existing in the community in which a person lives or is
well-known. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL
LAW COMPENDIUM 494 [6" rev. ed.]). It is submitted
that such reputation may be that existing among a

926

Parol Evidence Rule

person's associates. (See FRE 803[21]). The reason
is that in modern urban communities, individuals are
more anonymous. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 139 [(2004 ed.])

Witness' opinion
The former rule was that a witness' opinion is not
admissible to prove character unless (1) character
itself is in issue, or (2) in rape cases where opinion of
the victim's past sexual conduct is admissible if found
relevant by the court (Rape Shield Rule, S5 R.A.
No. 8505"
The 2020 Rules on Evidence adopted the rule in

FRE 405(a) when in provided that "in all cases in
which evidence of character or a trait of character of a
person is admissible, proof may be made by testimony
.• in the form of an opinion."

Specific instances of conduct
Generally specific Instances of conduct may not
be used to prove character. This would cause unfair
surprise upon the other party and result in the case
getting bogged down on collateral issues. (ANTONIO
R. BAUTISTA, BASIC EVIDENCE 138 [2004 ed.);
People v. Babiera, 52 Phil. 97)
When evidence of a person's character or
character trait is admissible, it may be proved by
testimony about the person's reputation or by testimony
in the form of an opinion. On cross-examination of the
character witness, the court may allow an inquiry into
relevant specific instances of the person's conduct.
(S54[c] R130, FRE R405[a]).
er FRE 406(a), testimony in opinion form ls admissible to prove
character.

927

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
In cases in which character or a trait of character
of a person is an essential element of a charge, claim

or defense," proof may also be made of specific
instances of that person's conduct. (S54(c] R130
adopting FRE 405[b])
Also in rape, evidence of complainant's past
sexual conduct is admissible if found relevant by
court. (Rape Shield Rule, S5 RA 8505).
Q.

D was prosecuted for homicide for allegedly
beating up V to death with an iron pipe.
(a) May the prosecution introduce evidence that V
had a good reputation for peacefulness and
non-violence?
(b) May D introduce evidence of specific violent
acts by V? (02 Bar 14)

A.

(a) Yes the prosecution may introduce evidence that
V had a good reputation for peacefulness and nonviolence.
Evidence of the good or bad moral character of
the offended party is admissible if it tends to establish

the probability or improbability of the offense charged.
(S54[al[1J R130).
Here the evidence would tend to establish the
probability of homicide by showing that D was the
aggressor and countering any claim of self-defense by D.
(b) No, D may not introduce evidence of specific
violent acts by • The general rule is that the
character of a person must be proved by reputation
evidence and not by evidence of specific violent

acts. (People v. Babiere, 52 Phil. 97, 110).
7 other words, character itself is in issue (Adviscr'y notes to 2019 FRE)

928

Paro! Evidence Rule

Q.

Dave is on trial for sexual assault of Delly, a law
student who sidelines as a call center agent. Dave
offers the testimony of Danny, who says that Dave
is known in the community as a decent and
discerning person, The prosecution presents a
rebuttal witness, Dovie, who testifies that, if Dave
was reputed to be a good person, the reputation
was a misperceptlon because Dave had been
previously convicted of homicide,
ls Dovie's testimony admissible as to the
character of Dave? (18 Bar Q14)

A.

No, Dovie's testimony is not admissible as to the
character of Dave

Under the Law on Evidence, the evidence to
prove character is as a rule limited to testimony as to
reputation or testimony in the form of an opinion.
Here while Dave had introduced evidence of his
good moral character thus allowing the prosecution to
offer evidence of his bad moral character in rebuttal,
the proof of character used by the prosecution was a
specific instance of conduct (a prior conviction), which
is allowed only in cross-examination of the character
witness.

O.

Dave is on trial for sexual assault of Delly, a law
student who sidelines as a call center agent. Dave
takes the witness stand. On cross-examination, may
the prosecutor ask Dave if he was previously
convicted of homicide?

929

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

If Dave did not testify regarding his good moral
character, the prosecutor may not ask him about his
prior conviction, notwithstanding S3(5) and S11 R132.
The reason is that an accused cannot be crossexamined on matters stated in the direct. (See S1[d]
R115). However if Dave testified regarding his good
moral character, then the prosecutor can cross-examine
him thereon because it was covered in his direct.

930

RULE 131. BURDEN OF PROOF, BURDEN
OF EVIDENCE, AND PRESUMPTIONS
Q.

What is burden of proof?

A.

Burden of proof ls the duly of a party to present
evidence on the facts in issue necessary to establish
his claim or defense by the amount of evidence
required by law. (S1 R131)

The burden of proof rests upon a party asserting
the affirmative of an issue. Thus Plaintiff who alleges
defendant's negligence has the burden of proof. This
is often with the Plaintiff but it need not necessarily be
80. The Defendant in a suit for enforcement of written
contract who raises the defense of forgery has the
burden of proof of proving forgery The key query is
who is the party asserting the affirmative of an issue.
Q.

What is burden of evidence?

A.

Burden of evidence is the duty of a party to present
evidence sufficient to establish or rebut a fact in issue
to establish a prima facie case. (S1 R131, 2020 Rules
on Evidence). initially the party having the burden of
proof also has the burden of evidence.

Q.

Does burden of proof shift? How about burden of
evidence?

A

Burden of proof never shifts but burden of evidence
may shift from one party to another in the course of
the proceedings, depending on the exigencies of
the case. (Id.).
Thus in a torts case, if the plaintiff has presented
evidence on defendant's negligence sufficient to
establish his claim, the burden of evidence to disprove
the plaintiff's claim that defendant is negligent shifts to

931

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IE

the defendant. If the defendant presents sufficient
countervailing evidence then the burden of evidence
shifts back to the plaintiff again. Take note however
that the burden of proof on the issue of negligence is
always with the plaintiff.
Q.

What is the equipoise doctrine?

A.

The equipoise doctrine states that where the evidence
on an particular issue is in equipoise or level or where
the party not having the burden of proof has produced
countervailing evidence, the result is that the party
with the burden of proof will lose out on that particular
issue. (Rivera v CA, G.R. 115625, 23 January 1998)
Hence in a torts case where the parties' evidence
on whether or not the defendant was negligent is
evenly balanced, the plaintiff will lose out since he has
not proven the defendant's negligence by preponderant
evidence.
In a criminal case where the burden of proof of
showing the accused's guilt is with the prosecution, if
the defense has presented countervailing (not necessarily
equalizing) evidence which will cast reasonable
doubt, then the prosecution will lose out on the issue
of the accused's guilt

0.

G files a complaint for recovery of possession
and damages against F. In the course of the trial,
G marked his evidence but his counsel failed to
file a formal offer of evidence, f then presented In
evidence tax declarations in the name of his
father to establish that his father is a co-owner of
the property. The court ruled in favor of F, saying
that G failed to prove sole ownership of the
property In the face of F's evidence. Was the
court correct? Explain briefly. (07 Bar Q7b).

932

Rule 131

Burden of Proof, Burden of Evidence,
And Presumptions

A.

The court ruled correctly but not on the basis of F's
countervailing evidence but on the ground that G
failed to discharge his burden of proof.
In an action for recovery of possession of
property, the burden of proof is with the plaintiff. Since
the plaintiff did not file a formal offer of evidence, the
court had no evidence to consider. Evidence not
formally offered may not be considered by the court.
While tax declarations are not proof of
ownership, a party having the burden of proof cannot
rely on the weakness of the other party's evidence but
must rely on the strength of his own evidence. Here G
did not file a formal offer of evidence. Hence the trial
court had no evidence to consider 9

Q.

What is a presumption? Explain briefly the nature
of presumptions.

A.

A presumption is an assumption of fact resulting from
a rule of law which requires such fact to be assumed
from another fact or set of facts. (STEVEN H. GIFIS,
LAW DICTIONARY 160 (1975])
Most presumptions are based on logical inferences
An underlying fact gives rise to a reasonable inference
that another fact (the presumption) exists, since there
is a logical connection between the fact in existence
and the fact presumed. Essentially a presumption is
based on a probability (albeit a high one), that is, if an
underlying fact exists it is highly probable that the
presumed fact also exists. Since it is based on a
probability, a presumption may be rebutted. An

re

question is ambiguous since It did no! state the details of G's
testimor.lal evidence. Although G failed to formally offer his documentary ant
object evidence, his testimonial evidence may have been sufficient ta establish
his ownership pf the propeny.

933

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

example of this kind of presumption is that a person
found in possession of a thing taken in the doing of a
recent wrongful act is the taker and the doer of the
whole act. (S3[1] R131).
Other presumptions are based on the generally
known results of wide human experience, An example
Is the presumption that a person takes ordinary care
of his concerns. (S3[1] R131)
Q.

Distinguish a conclusive presumption from a
disputable presumption.

A.

A conclusive presumption (also known as a nonrebuttable presumption) is one which no evidence,
however strong, no argument, or consideration will be
permitted to overcome. In the strict sense, since a
presumption always properly refers to a rebuttable
assumption of a fact, when the term presumption is
used in the conclusive sense, it is not a true
presumption but is actually a statement of a rule of
substantive law. (See McCormick, Evidence 804 [2d
ed. 1972])
On the other hand a disputable or rebuttable
presumption is one which is satisfactory if uncontradicted,
but may be contradicted and overcome by other
evidence. (S3 R131)

Q

Give instances of conclusive presumptions.

A

The following are instances of conclusive presumptions:
(a)

Whenever a party has, by his own declaration,
act, or omission, intentionally and deliberately led
another to believe a particular thing is true, and to
act upon such belief, he cannot, in any litigation
arising out of such declaration, act, or omission,
be permitted to falsify it. (S2[a] R132)

934

Rule 131

Burden of Proof, Burden of Evidence,
And Presumptions

(b) The tenant is not permitted to deny the title of his
landlord at the time of the commencement of the
relation of landlord and tenant between them.
(S2[b] R131)
(c) Presumption that an incomplete but delivered
negotiable instrument has been filled up properly
and presumption that a complete but undelivered
negotiable instrument has been delivered validly if
such instruments are in the hands of a holder in due
course. (S14 & 16, Negotiable Instruments Law).

(d) An acknowledgment in a policy or contract of
insurance of the receipt of premium is conclusive
evidence of its payment, so far as to make the
policy binding, notwithstanding any stipulation therein
that it shall not be binding until the premium is
actually paid. (S78 Insurance Code)
Q.

Ermitanio leased a house and lot to Paglas.
During the lease period, Paglas learned that
Ermitafio had mortgaged the house and lot to Yap
who later acquired it at the foreclosure sale.
Paglas bought the realty from Yap. Ermitanio later
filed an unlawful detainer case against Paglas
which was dismissed, the trial court saying that
Paglas had acquired the right to possess the land
by buying it from Yap. On appeal, Ermitanio argues
that Paglas is not permitted to deny Ermitano's
title over the realty in accordance with Sec. 2(b) of
Rule 131 which provides that "the tenant ls not
permitted to deny the title of his landlord at the
time of the commencement of the relation of
landlord and tenant between them." ls Ermitanio's
argument correct?

935

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

No. The presumption under S2(b) R131 does not bar
a tenant from challenging the landlord's title by title
subsequent to the commencement of the lease
contract. Here the tenant Paglas had purchased the
leased land from the mortgagee-purchaser in the
extrajudicial foreclosure sale and hence his title was

subsequent to the commencement of the lease
contract. (Ermitano v. Paglas, 23 January 2013).
Q.

Give examples of disputable presumptions.

A
1)

That a person is innocent of crime or wrong.
(S3[a] R131).

2) That evidence willfully suppressed would be
adverse if produced. (S3[e] R131). The presumption
does not apply from the prosecution's failure to
present the NBI agents and the fingerprint and
paraffin tests, since the defense could have obtained
the said evidence which was equally available to
it (People v. Realon, G.R. L-30832, 29 August
1980). The presumption does not also apply if the
evidence claimed to be suppressed Is merely
corroborative (People v. Casinillo, 213 SCRA 777
[1992]). If the suppression is in exercise of a
privilege, like the attorney-client privilege, the
presumption does not apply. (People v. Navaja,
G.R. No. 104044, 30 March 1993)

3) That a negotiable instrument was given or indorsed
for a sufficient consideration. (S3[s] R131). That
there was a sufficient consideration for a contract.
(S3[] R131). In Travel-On v. Court of Appeals,
210 SCRA 351, the SC held that a check is by
itself sufficient evidence of the debt and that the
check holder does not need to present the covering
documents or invoices.
936

Rule 131
Burden of Proof, Burden of Evidence,
And Presumptions

4) That a letter duly directed and mailed was received
in the regular course of mail. (S3(v) R131). Hence
one need not present the return card. The facts to
be proved in order to raise this presumption are:
(1) the letter was properly addressed with postage
prepaid, and (2) the letter was mailed. (Barcelon,
Roxas Securities , CIR, G.R. 157064, 7 August
2006). Note however that in BP 22 cases, the SC
requires actual proof that the accused received
notice of dishonor
5) That a man and a woman deporting themselves as
husband and wife have entered into a lawful
contract of marriage. (S3[aa] R131). Hence they
need not present a marriage certificate
6) That a printed or published book, purporting to be
printed or published by a public authority, was so
printed or published. (S3(gg]).

7)

That a printed or published book, purporting to
contain reports of cases adjudged in tribunals of a
foreign country where the book is published,
contains correct reports of such cases. (S3[hh]).
Thus you do not need to get a certified true copy

of the case.
Q.

Petitioners flied a complaint against Respondents
Abra Valley Colleges, Inc. and its officers for
Inspection of corporate books and records.
Respondents filed an answer raising the affirmative
defense that Petitioners are not stockholders of
Abra Valley. Respondents however did not present
the stock-and-transfer book to prove their affirmative
defense that Petitioners are not stockholders. Will
this give rise to the presumption that evidence
willfully suppressed would be adverse if produced?

937

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

Yes. (/nsigns v. Abra Valley Colleges, Inc., 29 July
2015, Bersamin, J.)

Q.

On 14 February 1990, respondent Eduardo De
Guzman, Sr., along with Dong Hee Kim, Chul Ho
Shin, and Bong II Kim, all of whom were
incorporators of Yeson International Philippines,
Inc., executed a Continuing Guaranty/Comprehensive
Surety wherein they bound themselves, jointly
and severally, to pay any and all obligations,

including all accrued interest and charges,
attorney's fees, and costs of litigation, obtained by
the company from petitloner PNB, The agreement
provides that "this is a continuing guaranty and
shall remain in full force and effect until written
notice shall have been received by you PNB that it
has been revoked by the undersigned." PNB later
sued De Guzman on the surety agreement upon
default of Yeson. De Guzman raised the defense
that he had sent by registered mail a letter of
revocation to PNB. PNB denied receiving the
letter. Unfortunately, De Guzman could not obtain
a certification from the Muntinlupa Post Office as
to the delivery of the said letter because all
records of dispatches for the year 1991 were
already disposed by said office due to the fact
that De Guzman's request in 2010 has already
passed their retention period. However he was
able to present the registry receipt proving that he
sent the letter by registered mall. Old De Guzman
adduce adequate proof that he had mailed the
revocation letter to PNB?

A.

Yes. On the basis of of S3(v) R131 when a mail
matter was sent by registered mail, there arises a
disputable presumption that it was received in the
regular course of mail. The facts to be proved in order
to raise this presumption are: (a) that the letter was

938

Rule 131
Burden of Proof, Burden of Evidence,

And Presumptions
properly addressed with postage prepaid; and (b) that
it was mailed. In Commissioner of Internal Revenue v.
Metro Star Superama, Inc., citing Barcelon, Roxas
Securities, Inc. (now known as UBP Securities, Inc.)
v. Commissioner of internal Revenue, the Court had
the occasion to stress that in order to prove the fact of
mailing, the second requisite above, it is important
that a party proving the same present sufficient
evidence thereof, such as the registry receipt issued
by the Bureau of Posts or the registry return card
which would have been signed by the petitioner or its
authorized representative.
The presumption thus arises that De Guzman's
letter of revocation was received by PNB in the
regular course of mail PNB failed to overcome said
presumption. The Court had consistently ruled that
when a document is shown to have been properly
addressed and actually mailed, there arises a
presumption that the same was duly received by the
addressee, and it becomes the burden of the latter to
prove otherwise. Here, PNB's bare, self-serving
denial, and nothing more, does little to persuade. To
the Court, PNB's mere denial cannot prevail over the
records presented by De Guzman such as the letter
of revocation and the registry receipt, which constitute
documentary evidence enjoying the presumption that,
absent clear and convincing evidence to the contrary,
these were duly received in the regular course of mail.
(Allied Banking Corp. v. De Guzman, 9 July 2018,
Peralta, 4.

4compare with Barcelon, Roxas Securities v, CIR, 7 August 2006, where
the addressee's bare denial was sufficient to overthrow the presumption under
S3(v) R131 since the sender did not present the registry receipt or return card or

post offie certification

939

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Plaintiff, pursuant to a memorandum of agreement
with defendant spouses, invested 5 mlllion in the
defendants' corporation (which operates amusement

centers in various malls) for which he would be
entitled to 50% of the net profits. Under the

agreement, defendants would have exclusive
control over the operations of the amusement
centers, with plaintiff acting as a mere investor in
the said ventures. Plaintiff sued the defendants for
his share of the net profit. He presented evidence
showing the corporation's gross revenue but not
its net profits. The defendants did not present any
evidence, The RTC dismissed plaintiff's complaints
since all his evidence showed only the gross revenue
but not the net profits of the corporation. Was the
dismissal of the plaintiff's complaint correct?
A.

No, the dismissal of the complaint was not correct.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the presumption is that
evidence willfully suppressed would be adverse if

produced.
Here defendants had exclusive control over the
operations of the amusement centers, with plaintiff
acting as a mere investor, The plaintiff had no access
to the corporation's financial statements which were
all in the possession of defendants. Defendants could
have easily rebutted plaintiff's claim for his share of net
profits by producing the pertinent documents. Thus
the presumption that evidence willfully suppressed

would be adverse if produced is applicable.
Plaintiff is entitled to receive his share of the net

profits, even though he failed to prove the exact
amount thereof. The Supreme Court awarded plaintiff
temperate damages of roughly 50% of the gross

revenue. (Evangelista v. Andolong, 16 November
2016, Perlas-Bernabe, J.)

940

Rule 131
Burden of Proof, Burden of Evidence,
And Presumptions
Q.

Mary Grace Natividad S. Poe-Llamanzares (petitioner)
was found abandoned as a newborn infant in the
Parish Church of Jaro, llollo on 3 September 1968.
Subsequently she ran for President of the
Philippines in 2016. It was argued that she was
disqualified to run for President because she is a
foundling whose parents are unknown and hence
there is no evidence that she is a natural-born
Filipino citizen, The petitioner argues that the fact
that she was found in lloilo raises a disputable
presumption that her parents are Filipino citizens
and that the burden of proof was on the oppositors
to show that her parents were not Filipino
citizens. Is the petitioner correct in her argument?

A.

Yes. There is a disputable presumption that things
have happened according to the ordinary course of
nature and the ordinary habits of life. (S3[y] R131).
All of the foregoing evidence, that a person with
typical Filipino features is abandoned in Catholic
Church in a municipality where the population of the
Philippines is overwhelmingly Filipinos such that there
would be more than a 99% chance that a child born in
the province would be a Filipino, would indicate more
than ample probability if not statistical certainty, that
petitioner's parents are Filipinos. To assume otherwise
ls to accept the absurd, If not the virtually impossible,
as the norm. (Poe-Llamanzares v, COMELEC, 8
March 2016, e.b., Perez, J.).

Q.

What Is the effect of a presumption in civil actions
and proceedings?

A.

In all civil actions and proceedings not otherwise
provided for by the law or these Rules, a presumption
imposes on the party against whom it is directed the
burden of going forward with evidence to rebut or
meet the presumption. (S5 R131, 2020 Rules on
Evidence).

941

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the rule in case of inconsistent
presumptions in a civil action or proceeding?

A.

If presumptions are inconsistent, the presumption that
is founded upon weightier considerations of policy
shall apply. If considerations of policy are of equal
weight, neither presumption applies. (Id.).

0.

What ls the effect of a presumption against the
accused in a criminal case?

A.

fa presumed fact that establishes guilt is an element
of the offense charged or negates a defense, the
existence of the basic fact must be proved beyond
reasonable doubt and the presumed fact follows from
the basic fact beyond reasonable doubt. (S6 R130,
Rule on Evidence).

942

RULE 129. WHAT NEED NOT BE PROVED
0.

What matters need not be proved in court?

A.

Matters of which the court has taken judicial notice
and judicial admissions do not require proof

0.

Define judicial notice.

A.

Judicial notice is a process whereby the court takes
note of certain facts which are capable of being
known to a veritable certainty by consulting sources of
indisputable accuracy, thereby relieving one party of
the burden of producing evidence to prove these facts.
(STEVEN H GIFIS, LAW DICTIONARY 112 [1975])
Judicial notice may be mandatory or discretionary.

Q.

When is judicial notice mandatory?

A.

A court shall take judicial notice, without the introduction
of evidence, of: (SIP NTG)

1)

STATES The existence and territorial extent of
states, their political history, forms of government
and symbols of nationality.

2)

INTERNATIONAL LAW. The law of nations, the
admiralty and maritime courts of the world and

their seals.
3)

PHILIPPINES. The political constitution and history
of the Philippines, the official acts of the legislative,
executive, and judicial departments of the National
Government of the Philippines.

4) LAWS OF NATURE.
5) MEASURE OF TIME
6) GEOGRAPHICAL DIVISIONS

943

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

ls the existence of diplomatic relations between
PH and Japan a matter of judicial notice?

A.

Yes, pursuant to S1&2 R129. (In re adoption of J.
Bulayo, 1 Oct 2019, Bersamin, C.4.).

0.

Can a court take judicial notice of foreign laws?

A.

Courts cannot take judicial notice of foreign laws.
The parties may however stipulate on what the
foreign law is in which case the same are judicial
admissions binding upon them and they cannot take a
contrary stance, (Philippine Commercial and Industrial
Bank v. Escolin, G.R. 27936, 29 March 1974)

0.

Can a court take judicial notice of ordinances?

A.

As a general rule no, since an ordinance is not an
official act of the legislative department of the National
Government of the Philippines. (S1 R129, 2020 Rules
on Evidence).

However a court may take Judicial notice of an
ordinance when required to do so by statute (e.g.
Charter of the City of Manila) or when the municipal
ordinance is of public knowledge or capable of
unquestionable demonstration.
Q.

In a land dispute case, was It proper for the Court
of Appeals take judicial notice of the Senate
Report regarding the Maysilo Estate?

A.

Yes since it is an official act of the legislative
department of the Philippines. (S1 R129). Nonetheless,
the Senate Report shall not be conclusive upon the
courts, but will be examined and evaluated based on
its probative value. That there is such a document as
the Senate Report was all that was conceded by the

944

Rule 129

What Need Not Be Proved

Court of Appeals. It did not allow the Senate Report to
determine the decision on the case. (CLT Realty Dev't
Corp. v, Hi-Grade Feeds Corp., 2 September 2015,
Perez, J.)
Q.

Should a court take judicial notice that Quezon
City was established only in 19397

A.

Yes, since Quezon City was established by virtue of a
charter or law which is an official act of the legislature
(Bernas v. Estate of Yu Han Vat, 15 August 2018,
Caguioa, J.)

O.

Can the Court of Appeals take judicial notice of
cases previously decided by it?

A.

No. It is well settled that, as a general rule, courts are
not authorized to take judicial notice, in the
adjudication of cases pending before them, of the
contents of the records of other cases, even when
such cases have been tried or are pending in the
same court, and notwithstanding the fact that both
cases may have been heard or are actually pending
before the same judge. (Id.).

Q

Malayan Insurance Company, as subrogee of the
consignee, filed an action for damages against
Petitioner Aslan Terminals, Inc. Malayan alleged
that it was the negligence of ATl's stevedores in
unloading the cargo which caused the loss and
damage to the insured cargo. The RTC ruled in
favor of Malayan Insurance, ATI argued that the
trial court should have taken judicial notice of
Section 7.01, Article VII of the Management Contract
for cargo handling services it entered with the
Philippine Ports Authority, which limits petitioner's
liability to P5,000.00 per package. ls ATl's
argument correct?

945

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

A.

No. The Management Contract entered into by
petitioner and the PpA is clearly not among the
matters which the courts can take judicial notice of. It
cannot be considered an official act of the executive
department. The PPA, which was created by virtue of

Presidential Decree No, 857, as amended, is a
government-owned and controlled corporation in
charge of administering the ports in the country.
Obviously, the PPA was only performing a proprietary
function when it entered into a Management Contract
with petitioner. As such, judicial notice cannot be
applied. (Asian Terminals Inc. v. Malayan Insurance
Co., 4 April 2011, Del Castillo, J.)
Q.

When is judicial notice discretionary?

A.

A court may take judicial notice of matters which are

of public knowledge, or are capable of unquestionable
demonstration, or ought to be known to judges
because of their judicial functions. (S2 R129)
•

A resident American, who came here from
Massachusetts, made a Will where he stated that,
in form, it is executed in accordance with
Massachusetts law. The Will, instituting his Filipino
widow as his sole heir, would not be valid in form
under Philippine law. Upon his death, the widow
presented the Will to the Regional Trial Court of
Manila. Probate was objected to by distant relatives
of the testator in California. The Judge had studied
In Harvard, and was familiar with Massachusetts
law. Without the introduction of formal evidence, he
granted probate, stating that the Will was, indeed,
executed in accordance with Massachusetts law.
How should the matter be resolved on appeal?
Explain your answer, (80 Bar 13ed)

946

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

A.

On appeal, the order granting allowance of the will
should be reversed.
The Supreme Court has held that a Philippine
court cannot take judicial notice of foreign laws which
have to be proved in evidence just like any other fact.
Here what was involved was a foreign law and
no evidence regarding the foreign law was adduced.
The fact that the judge was familiar with Massachusetts
law will not dispense with the requirement of evidence
since a judge's personal knowledge is not equivalent
to judicial notice.

0.

President Estrada assails the Supreme Court's
decision for adverting to newspaper accounts of
events to reach the conclusion that he has resigned.
ls President Estrada's protestation valid?

A.

No. The events mentioned are facts which are wellestablished and cannot be refuted. These are: (1)
Governor Chavit's expose, (2) "I accuse speech" of
Sen. Guingona, (3) the impeachment trial of the
petitioner. (4) the testimonies of Clarissa Ocampo and
former secretary Edgardo Espiritu, (5) Estrada's
agreement to hold a snap election and the opening of
the controversial second envelope, etc, These are
facts within udicial notice by the Supreme Court.
There was no need to cite their news accounts. The
news accounts only buttressed these facts as facts.
For all his loud protestations, Estrada has not singled
out any of these facts as false. (Estrada v. Desierto,
G.R. Nos. 146710-15, 3 April 2001). Under $2 R129,
a court may take judicial notice of matters which are
of public knowledge.

947

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May a court take judicial notice of a resolution by

the board of governors of the Development Bank
of the Philippines authorizing Its branch managers
to sign the verification and certification against
forum shopping?
A.

No. Courts are not, after all, expected to take judicial
notice of corporate board resolutions or a corporate
officers authority to represent a corporation, The
resolution should have been attached to the petition

for certiorari. Hence the dismissal of the petition was
proper (DBP • Court of Appeals, 7 October 2004).
Q.

May a court take judicial notice that vehicular
accidents cause whiplash injuries?

A.

No, This proposition is not public knowledge, or is
capable of unquestionable demonstration, or ought to
be known to judges because of their judicial functions.
Judges have no expertise in the field of medicine.
They are only tasked to apply and interpret the law on
the basis of the parties' pieces of evidence and their
corresponding legal arguments. (Dela Llana v. Biong,
4 December 2013, Brion, J.)

0.

May courts take judicial notice that personality
disorders are generally Incurable?

A.

No since this is not a matter that courts are mandated
to take judicial notice under S1 R129. (Singson v.
Singson, 8 January 2018, Del Castillo, J.)

0.

X sued
Panasia Banking Inc. (Panasia),
contending that the bank had allowed his son to
make unauthorized withdrawals from him account.

The complaint was later amended to include Bank
of Commerce on the allegation that there was a
merger between Bank of Commerce and Panasia.

948

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

In its judgment the trial court held Bank of
Commerce solidarily liable with Panasia for
damages. In response to Bank of Commerce's
denial that it had merged with anasia and had
bought only selected assets, the trial court said
that common sense dictates that a bank will not
just cherry pick assets. Was the trial court's
decision to hold Bank of Commerce solidarily

liable proper?
A.

No. The RTC' s assumption that Bank of Commerce
had merged with Panasia and had thereby taken over
all of the assets and liabilities of the latter, including
that for the negligent handling of X's account, was
unfounded. Such assumption had neither factual nor
legal support in the records. Instead, the RTC should
have required X to present evidence of the merger,
including its terms, in view of the petitioner's specific
denial of the same.
Merger was an act that could not be assumed; its
details must be shown, and its effects must be based
on the terms adopted by the parties concerned
(through their respective boards of directors) and
approved by the proper government office or agency
regulating the merging parties. In effect the RTC took
judicial notice of the merger between Bank of
Commerce and Panasia Banking, Inc. Contrary to the
findings and conclusions of the RTC, the merger of
Bank of Commerce and Panasia was not of common
knowledge. It was overly presumptuous for the RTC
to thereby assume the merger because the element
of notoriety as basis for taking judicial notice of the
merger was loudly lacking. (Bank of Commerce v.
Dela Cruz, 14 August 2017, Bersamin, J.).

949

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

May the RTC take judicial notice of an article
appearing in a website (www.himig.com.ph) in

ruling that the song "Lavandera Ko" is protected
by a copyright?
A.

No. The article in the website cited by the RTC
patently lacks a requisite for it to be of judicial notice
to the court because such article is not well and
authoritatively settled and is doubtful or uncertain. It
must be remembered that some articles appearing in
the internet or on websites are easily edited and their
sources are unverifiable, thus, sole reliance on those
articles is greatly discouraged. (Juan v. Juan, 23
August 2017, Peralta, J.).

Q.

ls a hearing requlrod before a court may take
judicial notice of a matter?

A.

Yes. Whether under S1 or S2 Of R129, a hearing is
required before the court may take judicial notice of a
matter. (S3 R129). This is to allow the parties lo be
heard on the matter
DURING THE PRE-TRIAL AND THE TRIAL.
During the pre-trial and the trial, the court, the court
motu propr'c or upon motion, shall hear the parties on
the propriety of taking judicial notice of arty matter.
BEFORE JUDGMENT OR ON APPEAL. The
court, motu proprio or upon motion, may take judicial
notice of any matter and shall hear the the parties
thereon if such matter is decisive of a material issue
in the Case (S3 R129).

Q.

What is a judicial admission?

A.

A judicial admission is an admission, oral or written,
made by a party in the course of the proceedings in
the same case. It does not require proof. (S4 R129).

950

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

Q.

Give examples of judicial admissions.

A.

a) The genuineness and due execution of an
actionable document copied In or attached lo a
pleading is deemed admitted by the adverse party if
he does not specifically deny it under oath and set
forth what he claims to be the facts (S8 R8)

b)

Material averment in the complaint, other than
those as to the amount of unliquidated damages,
shall be deemed admitted when not specifically
denied. (S11 R8).

c)

In a request for admission under R26, each of the
matters of which an admission is requested shall
be deemed admitted unless within the period
designated in the request which shall not be less
than 15 days after service thereof, the party to
whom the request is directed files and serves
upon the requesting party a sworn statement
either denying specifically the matters of which an
admission is requested or setting forth in detail
the reasons why he cannot truthfully either admit
or deny those matters. (S2 R26) Take note
however that any admission made by a party
pursuant to such request is for the purpose of the
pending action only and shall not constitute an
admission by him for any other purpose nor may
the same be used against him In any other
proceeding. (S3 R26)

d)

Stipulation of facts. (Diego v. Sandiganbayan, 339

SCRA 592)
e) Admissions in the pleadings.

951

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

P filed an action for collection of loan against D,
p attached to the complaint a copy of the
promissory note evidencing the loan signed by D.
D filed an unsworn answer specifically denying
that he signed the note. After the presentation of
his testimonial evidence, P rested his case
forgetting to formally offer in evidence the promissory
note. The court rendered judgment in P's favor
taking into consideration the promissory note. On
appeal, D assigns as error the court's taking into
consideration the promissory note although It
was not formally offered in evidence. ls D's
assignment of error meritorious203

A.

No. D's failure to specifically deny under oath the
promissory note which was an actionable document
resulted in D's implied admission of its genuineness
and due execution, The same is a judicial admission
and hence does not require proof pursuant to
$4 R129.

0.

X sued Y, a shipping co., based on a contract of
carriage contained in a bill of lading. The bill of
lading, an actionable document, was pleaded and
attached to the complaint. Y, without alleging
anything else, merely assailed the validity of the
agreement in the bill of lading for being contrary
to public policy. After presenting evidence, X did
not formally offer for admission the bill of lading.
The court ruled for X. On motion for reconsideration,
Y alleged that X failed to prove his action as
the bill of ladlng was not formally offered. Decide.
(96 Bar Q15-2)

gased on Question No. 14 0f 1974 Bar

952

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

A.

Motion for reconsideration is denied, Y's failure to
specifically deny under oath the bill of lading which
was an actionable document resulted in his implied
admission of its genuineness and due execution,
The same is a judicial admission and hence does not
require proof pursuant to S4 R129.

Q,

ls the Defendant's failure to file an answer to the
complaint an implied admission of the material
allegations thereof?

A.

No. Under S3 R9, where the defendant has been
declared in default, the court may in its discretion
require the claimant to submit evidence. Evidently
this presupposes that the defendant had not made an
Implied admission of the material averments of the
complaint. (See Heirs of de Guzman v. Perona, 2
July 2010, Peralta, 4.)

Q,

Plaintiff sued Defendant for collection of the
purchase price of a land in the amount of
P2,200,000. Defendant In her answer stated that
she had paid P2 million and therefore owes the
Plaintiff only P200,000. During the trial, Defendant,
without objection, presented a receipt showing
payment of the P200,000. Nor did the Plaintiff
object to the admissibility of the receipt when
It was formally offered. The trial court rendered
judgment dismissing the case stating that Defendant
had fully paid her obligation. On appeal, Defendant
contends that the trial court erred in considering
the evidence of payment since there was a judicial
admission by Defendant that she still owes
P200,000. Is the Defendant's contention correct?

953

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il

A.

No. The benefit of a judicial admission may be lost by
failure to object to the presentation of evidence
contradicting it. It is noteworthy that when Defendant
presented the evidence of payment, Plaintiff did not
object thereto. When the receipt was formally offered
as evidence, Plaintiff did not manifest their objection
to the admissibihty of said document on the ground
that payment was not an issue, Since there was an
implied consent on the part of Plaintiff to try the issue
of payment, even if no motion was filed and no
amendment of the pleading has been ordered, the
RTC cannot be faulted for admitting respondent's
testimonial and documentary evidence to prove
payment, (Dela Cruz v. Concepcion, 11 October

2012, Peralta, J.).
Q

In an action for reconveyance of a parcel of land
filed in the Regional Trial Court, the defendant,
through his lawyer, filed an answer therein
admitting the averment in the complaint that the
land was acquired by the plalntlffthrough inheritance
from his parents, the former owners thereof.

Subsequently, the defendant changed his
lawyer and, with leave of court, amended the answer.

In the amended answer, the abovementioned
admission no longer appears; instead, the alleged
ownership of the land by the plaintiff was denied
coupled with the allegation that the defendant is
the owner of the land for the reason that he
bought the same from the plaintiff's parents
during their lifetime.
After trial, the Regional Trial Court rendered
a decision upholding the defendant's ownership
of the land.

954

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

On appeal, the plaintiff contended that the
defendant is bound by the admission contained In
his original answer.
ls the contention of plaintiff correct? Why?
(93 Bar Q4)

A.

No, the contention of plaintiff is not correct
Under S8 R10, an amended pleading supersedes
the pleading that it amends. Hence the admissions in

the superseded pleading cease to be judicial
admissions and may not be considered by the court
unless offered in evidence.

Here there was no showing that the plaintiff
offered the original answer in evidence.
Q.

May a judicial admission be contradicted?

A

No, except by showing that it was made through
palpable mistake or that the imputed admission was
not, in fact, made. (S4 R129)

955

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME l

A.

No. The benefit of a judicial admission may be lost by

failure to object to the presentation of evidence
contradicting it. It is noteworthy that when Defendant
presented the evidence of payment, Plaintiff did not
object thereto. When the receipt was formally offered
as evidence, Plaintiff did not manifest their objection
to the admissibility of said document on the ground
that payment was not an issue. Since there was an
implied consent on the part of Plaintiff to try the issue
of payment, even if no motion was filed and no

amendment of the pleading has been ordered, the
RTC cannot be faulted for admitting respondent's

testimonial and documentary evidence to prove
payment. (Dela Cruz v. Concepcion, 11 October
2012, Peralta, J.).
Q

In an action for reconveyance of a parcel of land
filed in the Regional Trial Court, the defendant,
through his lawyer, filed an answer therein
admitting the averment in the complaint that the
land was acquired by the plaintiff through inheritance
from his parents, the former owners thereof.
Subsequently, the defendant changed his
lawyer and, with leave of court, amended the answer.
In the amended answer, the abovementioned
admission no longer appears; instead, the alleged
ownership of the land by the plaintiff was denled
coupled with the allegation that the defendant is
the owner of the land for the reason that he
bought the same from the plaintiff's parents
during their lifetime.
After trial, the Regional Trial Court rendered
a decision upholding the defendant's ownership
of the land.

954

Rule 129
What Need Not Be Proved

On appeal, the plaintiff contended that the
defendant is bound by the admission contained in
his original answer.
ls the contention of plaintiff correct? Why?
(93 Bar 04)

A.

No, the contention of plaintiff is not correct.

Under S8 R10, an amended pleading supersedes
the pleading that it amends. Hence the admissions in
the superseded pleading cease to be judicial
admissions and may not be considered by the court
unless offered in evidence.
Here there was no showing that the plaintiff
offered the original answer in evidence.
Q.

May a judicial admission be contradicted?

A

No, except by showing that it was made through
palpable mistake or that the imputed admission was
not, in fact. made. (S4 R129).

955

RULE 132. PRESENTATION OF EVIDENCE
Q.

How is the examination of a witness presented in

a trial or a hearing done?
A.

The examination of witness presented in a trial or a
hearing shall be done in open court and under oath or

affirmation. Unless the witness is incapacitated to
speak or the question calls for a different mode of
answer, the answers of the witness shall be given
orally. (S1 R132).

0.

Give exceptions to the rule that the witness's
examination shall be done in open court and orally.

A.

The following are exceptions to the rule of open-court
examination of a witness:

a)

In civil cases covered by the Rule on Summary
Procedure, the testimony of a witness shall be by
way of affidavit. (S9 Rule on Summary Procedure)

There is no oral examination of a witness.
b) In criminal cases covered by the Rule on Summary
Procedure, the affidavits submitted by the parties
shall constitute the direct testimonies of the
witnesses who executed the same, subject to
cross-examination, redirect or recross examination.
(S15 Rule on Summary Procedure).
c)

Cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule (A.M.
No. 12-8-8-SC) and situations referred to in the
Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal
Cases. The judicial affidavit shall take the place
of the witness' direct testimony.

Mr exceptions to the generai rule of open-court examination have
swallowed up the general rule insofar as direct exacrination is concerned Live
examination of a witness is still applicable to cross-examination, e-direct, and re-cross.

956

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

d) Matters regarding the admissibility and evidentiary
weight of electronic documents may be proved by
affidavits subject to cross by adverse party. (S1
R9, Rules on Electronic Evidence),

•

What cases are covered by the Judicial Affidavit
Rule?

A.

The Judicial Affidavit Rule shall apply to all actions,
proceedings, and incidents requiring the reception of
evidence before the courts, investigating bodies and
officers authorized by the SC to receive evidence,
special courts and quasi-Judicial bodies.
This rule shall apply to all criminal actions:
(1) Where the maximum of the imposable penalty
does not exceed six years;

(2) Where the accused agrees to the use of judicial
affidavits, irrespective of the penalty involved; or

(3) With respect to the civil aspect of the actions,
whatever the penalties involved are.°
0.

May a witness testify In narrative form?

A.

No. The witness's testimony should be elicited by way

of questions and answers. (S1 8 S2 R132). Thes if
the witness does a narration instead of answering the
question, the answer may be stricken out upon
objection. (S39 R132). The reason is that if a witness
testifies in narrative form, the adverse party is
deprived of the opportunity to object to the testimony
beforehand.

gefar as criminal actions are concerned, it is largely the Revised
Guidelines for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases which governs. This is an
example of the confusion engendered by too many special rules of procedure or
evidence which tend to overlap.

957

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME

An exception is under S19 of the Rule on
Examination of a Child Witness which provides that
the court may allow a child witness to testify in
narrative form.

0.

What is the form of testimony in criminal cases?

A.

(a) For First Level Courts

In all criminal cases, including those covered by
the Rule on Summary Procedure, the testimonies of
witnesses shall consist of the duly subscribed written
statements given to law enforcement or peace officers
or the affidavits or counter-affidavits submitted before
the investigating prosecutor, and if such are not
available, testimonies shall be in the form of judicial
affidavits, subject to additional direct and crossexamination questions. (JAW)
The trial prosecutor may dispense with the sworn
written statements submitted to the law enforcement
or peace officers and prepare the judicial affidavits of
the affiants or modify or revise the said sworn
statements before presenting it as evidence.

(b) For Second Level Courts, Sandiganbayan and
Court of Tax Appeals

In criminal cases where the demeanor of the
witness is not essential in determining the credibility
of said witness, such as forensic chemists, medicolegal officers, investigators, auditors, accountants,
engineers, custodians, expert witnesses and other
similar witnesses, who will testify on the authenticity,
due execution and the contents of public documents
and reports.
and in criminal cases that are
2ope general rule is that pubic officers do not need to testify on the
authenticity of public documents since these are prima facie proof of their
contents ($23 R132) and moreover are an excepin to the hearsay rule (S44
R130). The situation referred to in the guidelines may be that provided for in Sec

958

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

transactional

in

character,

such

as

falsification,

malversation, estafa, or other crimes where the
culpability or innocence of the accused can be
established through documents, the testimonies of the
witnesses shall be the duly subscribed written statements
given to law enforcement or peace officers or the
affidavits or counter-affidavits submitted before the
investigating prosecutor, and if such are not available,
testimonies shall be in the form of judicial affidavits,

subject to additional

direct and cross-examination

questions. (JAW)

In all other cases where the culpability or the
innocence of the accused is based on the testimonies
of the alleged eyewitnesses, the testimonies of these
witnesses shall be in pral_ form. (Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases)
Q.

ls this question on direct examination objectionable:
"What happened on July 12, 1999?" (02 Bar

013b).
A.

Yes since it calls for a narrative testimony. Narrative
testimony is impliedly but clearly proscribed by S1
and S2 R132 which requires that a witness' testimony
be elicited through questions and answers.
Here
the form of the question does not allow the adverse
party a reasonable opportunity to interpose any objection
as he does not have any idea of what answer the
question calls for. The direct examiner should reform

13 0f A.M. No. 12-11-2-SC (eff. 1 May 2014) wherein the court appearance of
government medical, chemical, or laboratory experts may be demanded by the
accused who is in detention for the purpose of cross-examination
Aile there is a statement in People v. Cellxtro, G.RR. No. 92355, 24
January 1991, that there is no legal principle which provents
witness from
giving his testimony ln a narrative form f he ls requested to do so by counsel,
such stateront is clearly not in accord with S1 and S2 R132 and should be
merely treated as obiter See also $39 RR132 0f the 2020 Rules on Evidence

959

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the question to make it more specific, without being
leading. Thus. "On July 12, 1999, did you go out on
a trip?" The question cannot be objected to as leading
since it is merely preliminary.

•

ls a witness obligated to answer questions?

A.

Yes, a witness must answer questions, although his
answer may tend to establish a claim against him. (S3

R132). Refusal to answer as a witness constitutes
direct contempt. (S1 R71 ).
Q.

What are the rights of a witness?

A.

Itis the right of a witness: (DRIPS)

1)

To be protected from irrelevant, improper, or
insulting questions, and from harsh or insulting
demeanor.

2)

Not to be detained longer than the interests of
justice require. SC Guidelines on Pre-trial and
Discovery (effective 16 August 2004) exhort
courts to adhere strictly to the "One-Day Examination
of Witness" Rule subject to justifiable exceptions.
The Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases provides that the court shall
strictly adhere to the rule that a witness has to be
fully examined in one day,

3)

Not to be examined except only as to matters
pertinent to the issue.

4)

Not to give an answer which will tend to subject
him to a penalty for an offense unless otherwise
provided by law. (self-incrimination

5) Not to give an answer which will tend to degrade
his reputation, unless it be to the very fact at
issue or to a fact from which the fact in issue
would be presumed. But a witness must answer

960

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

to the fact of his previous final conviction tor an
offense. (S3 R132)
Q.

What is the order In the examination of an
individual witness?

A.

The order in which an individual witness may be
examined is as follows:
a) Direct examination by the proponent.
b) Cross-examination by the opponent.

c) Re-direct examination by the proponent.
d) Re-cross examination by the opponent.
Q.

What is direct examination?

A.

Direct examination is the examination-in-chief of a
witness by the party presenting him on the facts
relevant to the issue. (S5 R132). In the light of the
judicial affidavit rule, most direct examinations are
now in the form of a judicial affidavit.

0.

What is cross-examination?

A.

It is the examination of a witness by the adverse party
upon the termination of the direct examination, (S6
R132)

Q.

What is the
examination?

A

The witness may be cross-examined by the adverse
party on any relevant matter with sufficient fullness

purpose and

extent of cross-

and freedom to test his accuracy and truthfulness and
freedom from interest or bias (atib) and to_ elicit all

important facts bearing upon the
issue (S6 R1323
re 2020 Rules on Evidence replaced the phrase as to any matter
stated in the direct examinatian, at connected therewith with or any elevant

matter. The arrendrent erphasizes that the Engtsh Rule is the general rule In

961

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What are the two rules regarding the scope of
cross-examination?

A.

The two rules regarding the scope of crossexamination are the English Rule and the American
Rule, Under the English Rule, the witness may be
cross-examined on all relevant aspects of the case
even if not covered in his direct. Under the American
Rule, a witness may be cross-examined only on
matters covered in his direct examination,

Q.

What rule do we follow in the Philippines?

A.

We follow the English Rule.

This may be gleaned

from the wordings of S6 R132 which provides that the

witness may be cross-examined pn any_relevant
matter with sufficient fullness and freedom to elicit all
important facts bearing upon the issue.

However in two instances, we follow the
American Rule:

(1) S13 R132: Cross-examination of a witness who
has been called as an adverse-party witness by
the other side or who has been declared as a
hostile or unwilling witness upon the initiative of
the other side.

(2) S1(d) R115.

Cross-examination of the accused

in a priminal case.

Q.

In 1994, the Estate of Butte (the Estate) filed an
action for cancellation of titles, recovery of
properties, and damages against several defendants,
including petitioner spouses Reuben and Minerva
Dela Cruz (the Dela Cruzes) before the Regional
Trial Court (RTC) of Antipolo City. On October 21,

cross-examination, The old phrasing led to some trial courts erroneously
applying the American rather than the English Rule,

962

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

1999 the Estate presented Myron C. Papa (Myron),
its executor, to testify on the substance of the
complaint. At the conclusion of Myron's testimony
on that day, the RTC required the Estate and the
latter agreed to present Myron anew at the next
scheduled hearing to identify the originals of
certain exhibits, after which counsels for the
defendants, would begin to cross-examine him,
But the Estate never got around recalling
Myron to the witness stand. He was taken ill and
diagnosed as suffering from stage four colon and
liver cancer, prompting the Estate's co-administrator,
to seek repeated postponements of hearings in
the case to allow Myron undergo Intensive treatment.
Later, the Estate filed a motion for leave to have
the defendants cross-examine Myron by deposition
at the hospital where he was confined. The RTC
granted the motion on February 22, 2001 and
eventually set the deposition-taking on September
7, 2001 but Myron passed away on August 16,
2001. The Petitioners moved that Myron's direct
testimony be expunged on the ground that they
were not able to cross-examine him. Should the
motion be granted?
A.

Yes. Testimony of witness who died before he could
be cross-examined must be expunged if there is no
showing of delay or fault by the party waiting to cross.
Here there was no such fault or delay on the part of
the Petitioners. (Sps. Dela Cruz v. Papa, 8 December
2010, Abad, J.)

Q.

In a reversion case filed by the Republic against
Traders Royal Bank, a witness had testified
previously against Traders Royal Bank (TRB) and
was cross-examined by TRB. May the testimony

963

PRIMER- REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

of the witness be admitted in evidence against
Bank of Commerce which had no opportunity to
cross-examine the witness?
A.

No, There was no proof that Bank of Commerce was
the successor-in-interest of Traders Royal Bank,
which was able to cross-examine the witness.
(Republic v. SB & TRB, 2 Oct 2019, Reyes, J.)

Q.

What is re-direct examination? Give its purpose

and extent.
A.

Re-direct examination is the examination of the
witness by the proponent, after the witness had been
cross-examined. The witness may be examined by
the party calling him, to explain or supplement his answers
given during the cross-examination. (S7 R132).

Q.

On re-diroct examination, may questions on
matters not dealt with during the cross-examinato
i n
be allowed?

A.

Yes in the discretion of the court. (S7 R132).

Q.

What is re-cross-examination?

A.

Re-cross-examination is the examination of the
witness by the opponent, after the witness's re-direct
examination. (S8 R132).

0.

lay the witness be re-cross-examined on matters
not stated in his re-direct examination?

A.

Yes in the discretion of the court, (S8 R132)

Q.

After the examination of a witness by both sides
has been concluded, may the witness be recalled?

A.

Yes but with leave of court. The court will grant or
withhold leave in its discretion, as the interests of
justice may require. (S9 R132)
964

Rule 132

Presentation of Evidence

Q.

What is a leading question?

A.

One which suggests to the witness the answer which
the examining party desires.

Q.

Is a leading question allowed?

A.

As a rule a leading question is not allowed. The
reason for prohibiting leading questions is that it is
virtually the lawyer testifying rather than the witness.

Q.

When are leading questions allowed?

A.

Leading questions are allowed
instances: (PICACHU)

in

the

following

On cross-examination

On preliminary (background) matters.
Ignorant witness, child of tender years, feebleminded or deaf-mute witness.
Unwilling or hostile witness.
Adverse-party witness, or a director, officer, or
managing agent of a corporation, partnership, or
association which is an adverse party.
Child Witness (S20 RECW). Court has discretion
to allow leading questions if the same wilt further
the interests of justice.

0.

What is a misleading question? Is it allowed?

A,

A misleading question is one which assumes as true
a fact not yet testified to by the witness or contrary to
that which he has previously stated. It is never
allowed. If asked on direct, the more precise objection
is that the question lacks basis. (S10 R132)

965

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
Q.

What is meant by impeachment of a witness?

A.

Impeachment of a witness means to destroy or put In
doubt the credibility of the witness or his testimony. It
is not limited to showing that the witness is lying but
also to show that witness may be mistaken in his
observation or narration.

0.

What are the methods of impeachment of the
adverse party's witness?

A.

The methods of impeachment of the adverse party's
witness are: (CRIC)
1)

CONTRADICTORY EVIDENCE. Evidence that
the witness' testimony is wrong or untrue. The
purpose is not just to show an inconsistency but
to prove outright that the witness is mistaken or
lying. Thus if the witness testified that defendant's
car entered the intersection when the stoplight
was green in his favor but a video recording showed
otherwise, the video recording is contradictory
evidence. Predicate need not be laid.

2) REPUTATION EVIDENCE. Evidence that the
witness' general reputation for truth, honesty, or
integrity is bad. Note however that a party who is
allowed to impeach his own witness cannot do
by evidence of the witness' bad character.

so

(S13 R132)
3)

INCONSISTENT STATEMENT. Evidence that the
witness has made at other times statements
inconsistent with his present testimony.

4)

CONVICTION (FINAL). Evidence that the witness
has been convicted by final judgment of a crime if
(a) the crime was punishable by a penalty exceeding
one year or (b) the crime involved moral turpitude,
regardless of the penalty. However evidence of a

966

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence
conviction is not admissible if the conviction has
been the subject of an amnesty or annulment of
conviction. (S12 R132
The evidence may be
shown by the examination of the witness, or the
record of the judgment. (S11 R132).
Q.

May the adverse party's witness be impeached by
a witness who is of the opinion that the adverse
party's witness is a liar?

A.

No. While FRE 608(a) allows the impeachment of a
witness by reputation or opinion testimony, S11 R132
limits such impeachment to reputation evidence. Although
$54 R130 allows the use of opinion testimony to
prove character, it is submitted that S11 R132, being
the special provision on impeachment, prevails

Q.

Plaintiff's witness was asked on cross-examination
whether he had failed a lie-detector test. May this
question be objected to?

A.

Yes, on the ground that a witness may not be
impeached by evidence of particular wrongful acts, as
for instance, lying. (S11 R132). The purpose of the
question is to show that the witness was lying and
hence it is not proper impeachment of the witness.

Q.

Plaintiff P presents witness W to testify that
Defendant O punched P without provocation. On
cross-examination, D's lawyer asked W if it is true
that W had lied In another court case. Is the
question objectionable?

A.

Yes, on the ground that a witness may be not be
impeached by evidence of particular facts or acts.
(S11 R132, cf. FRE 608[bl).

rig is a new provision in the 2020 Rules on Evidence

967

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In the preceding question, assume that the question

was allowed by the trial court, and W denied

having lied in any court case. In his turn to
present evidence, may D present witness Y to
testify that W lied in a court case?

A.

No. Whether on cross or on his turn to present
evidence, D may not impeach W by evidence of
particular facts or acts.

a.

In a prosecution for murder, the prosecutor asks
accused Darwin if he had been previously
arrested for violation of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt

Practices Act. As defense counsel, you object.
The trial court asks on what ground/ls. Respond,
(10 Bar 012).
A.

Insofar as the question tends to show that Darwin had
committed murder, I would object on the ground that
the evidence sought to be obtained is irrelevant.
There is no logical connection between being arrested
for the violation of the Anti-Graft Law and committing
the crime of murder.
Insofar as the question tends to impeach Darwin's
testimony as a witness, the same is objectionable on
the ground that a witness may not be impeached by
evidence of particular wrongful acts. (S11 R132).
Insofar as the question tends to elicit evidence of
bad moral character, the same is
objectionable on the ground that the prosecution
cannot adduce evidence of the accused's bad moral
character except in rebuttal. (S54[a][2] R130)

Darwin's

The question may also be objected to on the
ground that it was not covered in the direct
examination if Darwin in his direct did not mention
anything about a previous arrest or criminal case.
(S1(0] R115)

968

Rule 132

Presentation of Evidence
O.

What is meant by an inconsistent statement which
may be used to impeach a witness as provided for
in $14 R132?

A.

An inconsistent statement is a statement made by the
witness which unexplained is different from and cannot
be reconciled with the witness' present testimony. It
refers to a statement made outside of the trial where
the witness is testifying, as for instance a statement to
the police investigator. (2 FLORENZ D. REGALADO,
REMEDIAL LAW COMPENDIUM 698 [9" rev. ed.]).
There is a divergence of views as to whether S14
R132 applies to a deposition made in the same case
but the majority view is that it does. Hence the
predicate should still be laid if one is impeaching a
witness with a prior inconsistent statement made in a
deposition in the same case.
Note tlat if the inconsistent statement was made
by a party himself, then it can be offered against him
not only for impeachment purposes but also as
substantive evidence. (Regalado, supra at 698-699).

Q.

How is a witness impeached by evidence of an
Inconsistent statement?

A.

Before a witness is impeached by evidence of an
inconsistent statement, the predicate must first be laid.

Q.

How is the predicate laid?

A.

The laying of the predicate is done as follows
(WREA): (Asked 96 Bar Q14)

o

Ifthe statement is in writing, it must first be shown
to the witness before any question is asked of
him concerning the statement.

"see FRE advisory committee rotes to FRE 813

969

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

o

The statement must be related to him, with the
circumstances of the time and place and the
persons present.

o

He must be asked whether he made such

statement.
o

Ifso, he must be asked to explain the inconsistency.

Q.

If the predicate is not- laid, what would be the
result?

A

If the predicate is not laid, the impeachment is not
complete and the witness has not been impeached
effectively. (People v. Cortezano, 375 SCRA 95).

0.

ls evidence of the good character of a witness
admissible?

A.

No, unless such character has been impeached
(S54[c] R130). In such a case, the party presenting

the witness can rehabilitate the witness by introducing
evidence of his good character.

0.

On cross-examination, Plaintiff's witness was
impeached by his prior inconsistent statement. On
re-direct, may the Plaintiff introduce evidence of
his witness' good character?

A.

No. Evidence of a witness' good character is
admissible only if such witness' character has been
Impeached. (S54[c] R130). Here the witness's
character was not impeached as what was used to
impeach him was not reputation evidence but an
inconsistent statement.

970

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

Q.

At the close of the trial, A's counsel marked for
identification and offered in evidence certified
copies of a Request for Admission and the Reply
thereto in a previous case between the opposing
party in the instant case, B, and a third party, C.
He offered the documents as evidence that In the
previous case, B had made a judicial admission of
a certain fact material to the present case, the
two-fold purpose thereof being to impeach B's
testimony in the present case and to establish
that certain fact. Should the court admit the
documents in evidence? Explain. (84 Bar Q11).

A.

The court should not admit the document for the
purpose of proving the certain fact nor for impeaching
B's testimony.
Any admission under R26, whether express or
Implied, is for the purpose of the pending action only
and shall not constitute an admission by him for any
other purpose nor may the same be used against him
in any other proceeding. (S3 R26). Hence the reply to
the request for admission may not be admitted by the
court as an admission to prove the certain fact.
Nor may the reply to the request for admission
be used to impeach B's testimony. S3 R26 provides
that the admission thereunder may not be used
against the admitter in any other proceeding. Hence
even if A would lay the predicate for impeachment
using an inconsistent statement, the prior admission
cannot be used against B for S3 R26 states that the
same [may not] be used against him in any other
proceeding."

'rhe suggested answer of the UPLC that the documents may be used
to impeach B's testimony if the predicate is laid overlooks the preclusive tenor of
S3 R26

971

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

•
A,

May a party impeach his own witness?
No. The general rule is that a party producing a

witness is not allowed to impeach the witness'
credibility (S13 R132). The basis for the rule is that a
party vouches for his witness' credibility.
Q.

When may a party impeach his own witness? (UHA)

A.
1) UNWILLING OR

HOSTILE WITNESS. If the

witness has been declared by the court as an
unwilling or hostile witness. A witness may be
considered as unwilling or hostile only if so
declared by the court upon an adequate showing
of his adverse interest, unjustified reluctance to
testify, and of his having misled the party into
calling him to the witness stand, (ARM),
2)

ADVERSE-PARTY WITNESS. If the witness is an
adverse party or a director, officer, or managing
agent (DOM) of a corporation, partnership, or
association (CPA) which is an adverse party

Q.

Plaintiff called the Defendant as an adverse·party
witness. After the examination of the Defendant
had been concluded, the Plaintiff calls as his next
witness W who will testify that Defendant has a
reputation in their community of being a liar. May
the Defendant object to W's testimony?

A.

Yes. The unwilling or hostile witness or the adverseparty witness may be impeached by the party
presenting him in all respects as if he had been called
by the adverse party, except_b, evidence_of_ his bad
character.3 (S13 R132)

7re teasan is that the party presenting the witness should have known
or investigated the witness general reputation for honesty, truth, and integrity

972

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

0.

Plaintiff filed a case for collection of money
against the Defendant. During the trial, the
Defendant called the Plaintiff as an adverse-party
witness. The Plaintiff was then cross-examined by
his own counsel. The trial court rendered a decision
against the Defendant in which it took Into
consideration the testimony of the Plaintiff as an
adverse party witness both on direct and on cross
by his own counsel. The Defendant contends that
it was error for the trial court to do so, especially
with regard to the Plaintiff's testimony on cross
by his own counsel, because of the rule that a
party who calls to the stand an adverse party
witness is not bound by the latter's testimony. ls
this contention correct?

A

No. A party who calls his adversary as a witness is
not bound by the latter's testimony only in the sense
that he may impeach the witness's testimony as if he
were called by the adverse party. It does not mean
however that such testimony may not be given its
proper weight, even as against the calling party.
(Gaw v. Chua, G.R. 160855, 16 April 2008).

Q.

Defendant's witness testified that she was aboard
a taxi when she saw the defendant's car enter the
intersection when the stoplight was green, On
cross-examination, may it be shown that she was
actually aboard a bus rather than a taxi?

A.

No. Under the Collateral Matter Rule, a witness
cannot be impeached by contradictory evidence on a
collateral matter. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA, BASIC
EVIDENCE 101-103 [2 ed.]) A collateral matter is a
fact which has no independent probative value. The
rationale for the rule is that the court's time should not
be wasted on collateral matters.

973

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Here whether the witness was onboard a bus or
a taxi does not have any independent probative value
or has no relevancy to prove or disprove any issue
In the action.
Q.

China Bank filed with the RTC a loan collection
case against Ever Electrical Mfg. Co. and Ng Meng
Tam, a surety to Ever's loan. Ng flied an answer
with affirmative defense of the nullity of the
suretyship contract. Ng moved for a preliminary
hearing on his affirmative defense which was
granted. After serving written interrogatories on
George Yap, China Bank's account officer, and
receiving Yap's answers thereto, Ng applied for
the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum and ad
testificandum against George Yap, China Bank
objected, arguing that Yap cannot be compelled
to testify in court because Ng did not obtain and
present Yap's judicial affidavit pursuant to Section 5
of the Judicial Affidavit Rule (AR). Should China
Bank's objection be sustained?

A.

No. Section 5 of the JAR expressly excludes from its
application adverse party and hostile witnesses. For
the presentation of these types of witnesses, the
provisions on the Rules of Court under the Revised
Rules of Evidence and all other correlative rules
including the modes of deposition and discovery rules
shall apply. Here it is enough for the party calling the
adverse party witness to serve beforehand written
interrogatories pursuant to S6 R25 and the case of
Aflugencia v. Metropolitan Bank & Trust Co,, 715
SCRA 399 (2014), which was done in this case. (Ng
Meng Tam v. China Banking Corp. 5 August 2015).

974

Rule 132

Presentation of Evidence

Q.

In a case covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule
(JAR), the plaintiff's witness (Mr. Villafuerte) was
cross-examined by the defense counsel of the
insurer on whether he had submitted proofs of
purchase of the raw materials. The witness
answered yes and he mentioned purchase orders,
sales invoices, and delivery receipts (questioned
documents).
During tho re-direct examination of Mr.
Villafuerte plaintiff's counsel produced the
Questioned Documents in open court and asked
Mr, Villafuerte to identify those documents, seeking
to Introduce and mark them as exhibits.
Respondents immediately objected in open court
to the Introduction and presentation of the
Questioned Documents on the grounds that they
were neither touched upon nor covered by the
witness' cross-examination, and that the same
were being introduced for the first time at this late
stage of proceeding, without giving the parties
opportunity to verify their relevance and authenticity.
They argued that since these documents were not
presented, identified, marked, and even compared
with the originals during the Pre-Trial Conference,

they

should

be

excluded

pursuant

to

the

Guidelines on Pre-Trial and JA Rule. Should the
objection be sustained?
A.

No. The matter regarding the questioned documents
was brought about during the cross-examination by
defense counsel of Mr, Villafuerte. Hence the
introduction of the questioned documonts was proper
during the re-direct of Mr, Villafuerte.
Moreover as can be gleaned from the Pre-Trial
Order, both parties reserved the right to present
additional evidence. Such a reservation Is tantamount
975

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

to a waiver of the application of Secs. 2 and 10 of the
JAR. (Lara's Gift & Decors Inc. , PNB General
Insurers, 24 January 2018, Velasco. .).
Q.

Give the rule regarding exclusion and separation
of witnesses.

A.

The court, motu proprio or upon motion, shall order
witnesses excluded so that they cannot hear the testimony
of other witnesses, This rule does not authorize
exclusion of (a) a party who is a natural person, (b) a
duly designated representative of a juridical entity
which is a party to the case, (c) a person Whose
presence is essential to the presentation of the party's
cause, or (d) a person authorized by a statute to
be present.
The court may also cause witnesses to be kept
separate and to be prevented from conversing with
one another directly or throuah intermediaries, until
all shall have been examined. (S15 R132, as amended
by the 2020 Rules on Evidence)

0.

Give an example of S15(c) R132.

A.

The category contemplates such persons as an agent
who handled the transaction being litigated or an
expert needed to advise counsel in the management
of the litigation. (Advisory notes on the 2019 FRE)

Q.

Respondent sued Petitioner corporation for
damages for installing defective floor tiles in her
house, Petitioner presented Kenneth Sy as its
witness. Stephen Sy was in the courtroom and he
listened to Kenneth's testimony, When Petitioner
was about to present Stephen as its next witness,
Respondent's counsel objected to the presentation

976

Rule 132

Presentation of Evidence

invoking S15 R132 on exclusion and separation of
witnesses. May the trial court disallow the
presentation of Stephen as a witness on the
ground that he heard the testimony of Kenneth?
A.

No. Without any prior order or at least a motion for
exclusion from any of the parties, a court cannot
simply allow or disallow the presentation of a witness
solely on the ground that the latter heard the testimony of
another witness. It is the responsibility of respondent's
counsel to protect the interest of his client during the
presentation of other witnesses. If respondent actually
believed that Kenneth's testimony would greatly affect
that of Stephen's, than respondent's counsel was
clearly remiss in his duty to protect the interest of his
client when he did not raise the issue of the exclusion
of the witness Stephen in a timely manner. (Desi
ng
Sources International v. Eristingcol, 19 February 2014)

Q.

May a witness be allowed to refresh his memory
respecting a fact?

A.

Yes, a witness may be allowed to refresh his memory
respecting a fact by a writing or record which is written
or recorded by the witness or under his direction at a
time when the facts were fresh in his memory and he
that the fact was correctly written or recorded.
(RFK) (S16 R132) Here the witness has momentarily
forgotten the fact but he can remember it if his
memory Is refreshed or jogged by the writing or record.
This procedure of refreshing the witness' memory is
known as "present memory refreshed."

new

0.

May the writing or record used to refresh the
witness' memory be offered in evidence?

A,

No. The writing or record used to refresh a witness'
memory has no independent evidential value and
cannot be offered in evidence. (Canque v. CA, 305

977

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

SCRA 579 [1999]). However the writing or record
must be produced and may be inspected by the
adverse party, who may cross-examine the witness
upon it and may read it in evidence. (S16R132).

If the writing or record however qualifies as an
independent documentary evidence itself and not
something used merely to refresh the witness's
memory, as in the case of a business record, then the
proponent may introduce it as documentary evidence.
The writing or record may be examined by the
adverse party who can use it to cross-examine the
witness and read it in evidence.
Q.

What if the witness retains no recollection of the
particular facts. May he testify from the writing or
record mentioned in the first sentence of S16
R1327

A.

Yes, provided he is able to swear that the writing or
the record correctly stated the transaction when made
(cstm). The writing or the record however must be
received with caution. The writing or record is also
known as "past recollection recorded." (PRR)

0.

X states on direct examination that he once knew
the facts being asked but he cannot recall them
now. When handed a written record of the facts he
testifies that the facts are correctly stated, but
that he has never seen the writing before, ls the
writing admissible as past recollection recorded?
Explain. (96 Bar Q14[3)

A.

No, the writing is not admissible as past recollection
recorded.
Under the Rules of Evidence, the writing or record
must be written or recorded by or under the direction
of the witness testifying therefrom
978

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

Here X testified that he has never seen the
writing before. Thus it is apparent that the same was
not written by him or under his direction. Hence the
writing is not admissible
Note: The fact that the record was not written by
X would also make the same hearsay.
Q.

Must the writing or record used to refresh the
witness' memory comply with the best evidence
rule? How about the writing or record which
records past recollection?

A.

The writing or record which is used to refresh a
witness's memory need not comply with the best
evidence rule since it does not have any independent
evidential value. On the other hand the record or
writing recording past recollection should comply with
the best evidence rule since it is being offered as
proof of its contents

Live-link TV testimony of a child witness
Q.

When may the live-link TV testimony of a child
witness be taken?

A

The prosecutor, counsel or guardian ad l!tem may
apply for an order that the testimony of the child be
taken in a room outside the courtroom and be
televised to the courtroom by live-link TV on the
ground that there is substantial likelihood that the
child would suffer trauma from testifying in the
presence of the accused, his counsel or the prosecutor
as the case may be, which trauma would impair the
completeness or truth of the testimony. Court may
motu proprio hear and determine, with notice to the
parties, the need for live-link TV testimony. The judge

979

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
may question the child in camera about his feelings
on testifying in the courtroom but not about the issues
at trial, (S25 RECW)

Videotaped deposition of child witness

0,

When may the videotaped deposition of a child
witness be taken?

A

The prosecutor, counsel, or guardian ad litem may
apply for an order that a deposltlon be taken of the
child's testimony and that it be recorded and
preserved on videotape. If the Judge finds that the
child will not be able to testify in open court during the
trial, it shall Issue the order

Q,

Who shall preside at the videotaped deposition of
the child?

A.

The judge shall preside at the videotaped deposition
of the child.

0.

When shall objections to deposition testimony or
evidence be made?

A.

Objections to deposition testimony or evidence shall
be stated and shall be ruled upon at the time of the
taking of the deposition.

Q.

May the accused cross-examine the child during
the deposition?

A.

Yes. The rights of the accused during trial, especially
the right to counsel and to confront and crossexamine the child, shall not be violated during
the deposition.

980

Rule 132
Presentation of Evidence

Q.

May the court admit the videotaped deposition in
lieu of the child witness's testimony?

A.

No. The exceptions would be if at the time of the trial
the court finds that the child is unable to testify
because: (1) there is substantial likelihood that the
child would suffer trauma from testifying in the
presence of the accused, his counsel or the prosecutor
as the case may be, which trauma would impair the
completeness or truth of the testimony; or (2) of any
reason under S4(¢) R23. In these cases, the court
may admit the videotaped deposition in lieu of his
testimony. (S27 RECW)

0.

Distinguish deposition pending trial under Rule 23
from videotaped deposition of a child witness
under the RECW.
DEPOSITION PENDING
TRIAL
UNDER RULE 23

VIDEOTAPED DEPOSITION
OF CHILD WITNESS

Civil Cases.

Criminal Cases

Generally court permission

Court permission required as

not required.

order should be applied for.

No ground required other
than deposition is relevant
and does not cover
privileged matter.

Ground is if the judge finds
that the child will not be able to
testify in open court during the
trial.

Presided over by officers

The judge trying the
case shall preside over the

---

------

mentioned in R23.

deposition taking.

981

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Objections made during

Objections to deposition

the deposition taking are
not ruled upon but merely

testimony or evidence shall be
stated and shall be ruled upon

noted by the officer. As a

at the time of the taking of the

general rule, objections
not made during the
deposition taking are not
waived and may be raised
when deposition is offered
In evidence.

deposition.

Use of deposition during
trial govemed by S4 R23.

Use of deposition during trial
governed by S27 RECW.

982

I

AUTHENTICATION AND
PROOF OF DOCUMENTS
Authentication in general
Q.

What is authentication?

A

Authentication is the process of establishing that
evidence is what it purports to be, in other words, that
it is genuine. In the case of private documents,
authentication means proving the due execution and
authenticity of a document which is offered as authentic.
(S20 R132)

Q.

Should a document be authenticated before it
may be received in evidence?

A.

We have to distinguish. Private documents as a rule
must be authenticated before they may be received in
evidence. ($20 R132), Public documents however

may be received in evidence without the need for
authentication. Authentication is not required of public
documents because they are presumed authentic by
virtue of their nature. The presumption may be
overthrown.
0.

What is a private document?

A.

A private document is a document other than a public
document. (S19 R132)

O.

How is a private document authenticated?

A.

Before a private document offered as authentic is
received in evidence it should first be authenticated,
that is, its due execution and authenticity should be
proved by (a) anyone who
the document
executed or written, (b) evidence of the genuineness
of the signature or handwriting of the maker, or (c)

saw

983

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

other evidence showing its due_ execution and
authenticity. (SGD), (S20 R132 as amended by the
2020 Rules on Evidence). S20(c) was added in the
2020 Rules on Evidence and recognizes among
others the doctrine of authentication by circumstantial
evidence as well as other means of authentication
provided by other evidenta
i ry rules, such as the Rule
on Electronic Evidence (REE)
Q.

How is the genuineness of a person's handwriting
proved?

A.

The genuineness of a person's handwriting may be
proved by: (WC)
1)

A witness who has seen the person write. What is

written here is a document other than the one
sought to be authenticated. If what the witness
saw is the execution or writing of the document,

the same is authenticated under S20(a) RR132.
2)

3)

Or has seen writing purporting to be his upon which
the witness has acted or been charged, and has
thus acquired knowledge of the handwriting of
such person. E.g. a signed instruction for a
person to make payment to a particular agent and
the statement of account thereafter shows that
the payment was credited.
A comparison, made by the witness or the court,

with writings admitted or treated as genuine by
the adverse party or proved to be genuine to the
satisfaction of the judge. (S22 R132).

0.

What is an ancient document? Does it need to be
authenticated?

A.

An ancient document is a private document which is
more than 30 years old, is produced from a custody in
which t would naturally be found if genuine, and is
984

Authenticat on and Proof of Documents

unblemished by any alteration or suspicious
circumstance. It does not need to be authenticated.
($21 R132)
Q.

May a private document be authenticated by
circumstantial evidence?

A.

Yes. Where there is no eyewitness to the execution
or writing of a private document or no evidence
concerning the genuineness of the maker's signature
or handwriting can be obtained, the document may
still be authenticated using circumstantial evidence.
Examples:
1) Self-authenticated documents. Where the facts in
the writing could only have been known by the
writer, For instance the use of code terms likely
to be known only by the participants in the
underlying events, or by other revealing contents,
such as dates, amounts, etc., known only to the
participants in the events. (ANTONIO R. BAUTISTA,
BASIC EVIDENCE 149 [(2004 ed.))
2)

Reply-authenticated documents. Where the reply
of the adverse party refers to and affirms the
sending to him and his receipt of the letter in
question, a copy of which the proponent is
offering in evidence.

3)

Reply-letter rule. Where a reply to a letter indicates
that the one writing the reply knew the tenor of
the letter, the reply is deemed authenticated,

Authentication by circumstantial evidence is now
expressly recognized in the 2020 Rules on Evidence
under S20() R132.

985

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

Former President Joseph Estrada argued that the
Supreme Court relied upon the Philippine Daily

Inquirer's excerpts from the Angara Dlary which
documentary evidence however was not authenticated.

May the Supreme Court rely upon the excerpts
even if these were not authenticated?
A.

Yes. The Supreme Court said that "a party who does
not deny the genuineness of a proferred instrument

may not object that it was not properly identified
before it was received in evidence." Estrada did not
object to the admissibility of the Angara Diary despite
opportunity to do so. (Estrada v. Desierto, G.R. Nos

146710-15, 15 April 2001)

Q
A.

How is a private electronic document authenticated?

Before any private electronic document offered as
authentic is received in evidence, its authenticity must
be proved by any of the following means: (DSR)
a)

Evidence that ii had been digitally signed.

b)

Appropriate security procedures or devices as
may be authorized by law or rules have been
applied to the document, or

c)

Other evidence showing its reliability and integrity
to the satisfaction of the judge. (S2 R5, REE)

Q.

What are public documents?

A.

Public Documents consist of: (PATO)
a)

OFFICIAL RECORDS. Written

official acts or

records of official acts of the sovereign authority,
official bodies and tribunals, and public officers,
whether of the Philippines or of a foreign country.
b)

Acknowledged documents (notarial documents),

except wills.
986

Authentication and Proof of Documents

c)

Documents that are considered public documents
under treaties and conventions which are in force
between the Philippines and the country of
source 213

d) Public records of private documents required by
law to be entered therein. (S19 R132),
Q.

May a death certificate be offered in evidence
without presenting the person who executed it?

A.

Yes. A death certificate is a public document, hence, there
is no need to present In court the person who executed it.
(People • Espina, 10 July 2019, Lazaro-Javier, J.;
Patungan v. People, 20 Jan 2020, Peralta, C.J.)

Q.

Are affidavits and sworn certifications public
documents?

A.

Affidavits and sworn certifications are not public
documents because they do not contain an
acknowledgement but a jurat. (See Cequena v. Bolante,
330 SCRA 216) A j~rat is applicable to affidavits,
certifications, or other statements of fact, while an
acknowledgement is applicable to acts or contracts
wherein the person states before the notary public
that he has freely and voluntarily executed the same.

0.

Does the non-submission of a notarial report
remove the public nature of a acknowledged
document or instrument?

A.

No. (Aboitiz v. Po, 5 June 2017, Leonen, J.).

----

gbsection (c) was added in the 2020 Rules on Evidence.

% republic • Marcos-Manotoc, G.R. No. 171701,8 February 2012, t
was stated that 'affidavits may be considered as public documents ff they ae
acknowledged before a notary public." (Italics supplied) The statement ls not
altogether correct sinoe an affidavit contains not an acknowledgment but e jurat.

987

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Il
Q.

ls a return of service of summons executed by a
foreign sheriff admissible to prove the fact of
service even without presenting in court the
foreign sheriff?

A.

It is submitted that the return of service is admissible
to prove the fact of service even without presenting
the foreign sheriff
Although S44 R130 refers to "[e]tries in official
records made in the performance of his duty by a
public officer of the Philippines," (italics supplied), this
provision should be read in conjunction with S19(a)
R132 and S23 R132 S19(a) R132 classifies as public
documents, the written official acts or records of the
official acts of public officers, whether of the
Philippines or of a foreign country. Under S23 R132,
"[dJocuments consisting of entries in public records
made in the performance of a duty by a public officer
are prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated."
Hence the return of service may be presented as
prima facie evidence of the fact of service even
without presenting the foreign sheriff. The requirements
of proof of official record under S24 R132 must of
course be followed.

0.

ls a "Divorce Report" issued by Japanese mayor
admissible as proof of divorce?

A.

Yes. It is considered an official record under S19a)
R132. Records show that the Divorce Report is what
the Government of Japan issued to petitioner and her
husband when they applied for divorce. There was no
"divorce Judgment" to speak of because the divorce
proceeding was not coursed through Japanese courts
but through the Office of the Mayor of Fukuyama City
in Hiroshima Prefecture. Japan. In any event, since
the Divorce Report was issued by the Office of the

988

Authentication and Proof of Documents

Mayor of Fukuyama City, the same is deemed an act
of an official body in Japan. By whatever name it is
called, the Divorce Report is clearly the equivalent of
the "Divorce Decree" in Japan; hence, the best
evidence of the fact of divorce obtained by petitioner
and her former husband. (Mora/a v. Republic, 5
December 2019, Lazaro-Javier, J.).

0.

Give an example of S19(e) R132

A.

Under the Apostille Convention on Authentication of
Documents to which the Philippines is a signatory,
where a foreign country which is a signatory to the
convention has affixed an apostille to a document,
that document need no longer be authenticated by a
Philippine consular officer in order to be received in
evidence in the Philippines.

Q.

What is the evidential nature of public documents?

A.

Documents consisting of entries in public records
made in the performance of a duly by a public officer
are prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated.
All other public documents are evidence, even against
a third person, of the fact which gave rise to their
execution and of the date of the latter (S23 R132)

Q.

Jose Marcial Ochoa died in an accident while
onboard a taxi cab owned and operated by G & S
Transport. His heirs sued G & S for damages.
Introduced in evidence of lost income was a
certification issued by the HRD chief of Jose's
employer, the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), regarding Jose's income.

"A esrtif\cation under the terms of the convention, If the convention
applies between two countries, such an apostille is sufficlont to certify a
0ocurent's valilly, and removes the need for double-certification, by the
originating country and then by the reoeying country

989

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

This was objected to on the ground that the
certificatlon was not authenticated and identified
in court by Its signatory and that the income
stated therein was not supported by receipts or
other evidence. Should the objection be sustained?

A.

No, Under S19(a) R132, records of official acts of
public officers whether of the Philippines or of a
foreign country are considered as public records.
Hore the USAID is an official government agency
of the USA and thus its HRD chief is a public officer.
Hence the certification is a public document under
$19(a) R132 and thus no longer needs to be
authenticated.

The certification as to income does not need to
be supported by other evidence for it is prima facie
evidence of the facts stated therein pursuant to S23
R132. (Heirs of Ochoa v.G & S Transport Corp., 16
July 2012).

0.

Prosecution for homicide of petitioner for shooting
to death the victim. The prosecution presented a
police captain who Identified in court a chemistry
report on a paraffin test showing the presence of
gunpowder residue on the petitioner's right hand.
The petitioner argued that the chemistry report
should not have been admitted in evidence since
the forensic chemist who actually conducted the
paraffin test on the petitioner was not presented
in court. Was the petitioner's argument correct?

A.

No. The chemistry report showing a positive result of
the paraffin test Is a public document under S19(a)
R132. As a public document, the rule on
authentication does not apply. It is admissible in
evidence without further proof of its due execution
and genuineness: the person who made the report

990

Authentication and Proof of Documents

need not be presented in court to identify, describe
and testify how the report was conducted. Moreover,
documents consisting of entries in public records
made in the performance of a duty by a public officer
are prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein

pursuant to S23 R132. (Kummer v. People, 11
September 2013, Brion, 4.).7°

0.

In 2009, petitioner filed with the RTC a petition
under R108 to correct a clerical or typographical
error in his sex, which was indicated in his birth
certificate as "female." He presented a medical
certificate by a government physician that he was
"phenotypically male." The RTC granted the
petition. On appeal, the Republic contends that
was orrot to admit the medical certificate since
the physician was not presented in court in order
that his qualifications may be established and so
that he may identify and authenticate the medical
certificate. ls the Republic's contention correct?

A.

No. The medical certificate is a public document, the
same having been issued by a public officer in the
performance of official duty; as such, it constitutes
prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated. Under
S23 R132, "[Jocuments consisting of entries in public
records made in the performance of a duty by a
public officer are prima facie evidence of the facts
therein stated."
There was therefore no need to further identify
and authenticate the medical certificate. "A public
document, by virtue of its official or sovereign character,
or because it has been acknowledged before a notary

-

---- - ----

"race note however of $13 0f A,M. No. 12-11.-2-SC, Bf 1 May 2014, re

accused who are under prevontive detention, wnich provides that the personal
appearance in count of the government medical, chemical, or laboratory expent
witness who prepared the report shall be unnecessary unless cdernanidea by the
accused for the purpose of cross-examination. (Italics supplied)

991

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

public (except a notarial will) or a competent public
official with the formalities required by law, or because

it is a public record of a private writing authorized by law,
is self-authenticating and requires no further authentication
in order to be presented as evidence in court."
(Republic v. Unabia, 11 Feb 2019, Del Castillo, J.).
Q.

Diamond Subdivision is a residential subdivision

in Balibago, Angeles City, Pampanga with several
commercial establishments operating within it.
These establishments include beer houses, karaoke
bars, night clubs, and other drinking joints.

Because of these, patrons, customers, and
many other people freely come in and out of
Diamond Subdivision, Such unrestricted access
to the subdivision, however, also exposed Its
residents to incidents of robbery, akyat-bahay,
prostitution, rape, loud music, and nolse lasting
until the wee morning hours.
Diamond Homeowners & Resident Association
(Diamond Homeowners), the legitimate homeowners'
association of Diamond Subdivision, sought to
address the residents' peace and security issues
by raising their concerns to the Angeles
City Council.

On 24 February 2003, the Angeles City Council
issued an ordinance reclassifying Diamond
Subdivision as exclusively residential and prohibited
the further establishment and operation of any
business except for those already existing, The
whereas clauses of the ordinance state the security
and safety concerns of the subdivision which
gave rise to the passage of the ordinance. ls the
ordinance prima facie evidence of such concerns?

992

Authentication and Proof of Documents

A.

Yes. The city ordinance is a public document. Under
$19(a) R132, written official acts of the sovereign
authority, official bodies and tribunals, and public
officers of the Philippines are public documents.
Hence, it is prima facie evidence of security and safety
concerns within subdivision. (S23 R132). (Kwong Mgt.
Inc. v. Diamond Homeowners Assoc. Inc., 10 June
2019, Leonen, J.).

Q.

Dizon filed an action for specific performance
against Matti in order to enforce a notarized deed
of sale where Matti was the purported seller of a
parcel of land to Dizon. Matti in her answer denied
having ever met Dizon and signing the deed of
sale. Matti offered in evidence her passport which
showed that she was in London at the purported
time she signed the deed of sale, Dizon countered
that the acknowledged deed of sale was a public
document and thus presumed to be genuine and
duly executed. Is Dizon's contention correct?

A.

No, The passport which is a public document, the
Issuance thereof being an official act of the OFA and
containing official stamps made by the Bureau of
Immigration, is clear and convincing evidence to
overthrow the presumption of genuiness and due
execution of a notarized document. If Matti was in
London at the alleged date of the execution of the
deed of sale, it is clear that her signature was forged.
(Dizon v. Matti, 27 March 2019, Caguloa, J.).

Q.

Yasuo filed a petition for declaration of nullity of
his marriage with Felisa on the ground that she
had a prior subsisting marriage at the time of their
marriage. Yasuo presented in evidence a certification
from the NSO that Felisa has two marriages, one
with Raymond in 1994 and the other with Yasuo in

993

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

2002. The trial court dismissed the petition on the
ground that Yasuo did not present as a witness
the NSO records custodian to certify to the
authencity and due execution of the certification.
Was the presentation of the NSO records custodian
as a witness during the trial necessary?

A.

No. The NSO certification is a public document
pursuant to Article 410 of the Civil Code which
provides that the books making up the civil register
and all documents relating thereto are public
documents and shall be prima facle proof of the facts
therein. Hence there was no need to present the
records custodian of the NSO to testify on their
authenticity and due execution. (/wasawa v. Gangan,
11 September 2013, Villarama, J.).

Q.

ls an acknowledged document evidence of the
facts expressed therein?

A.

There are some holdings which state that a notarial
(acknowledged) document is evidence of the facts
Such a holding is imprecise
expressed therein.
since an acknowledgement document refers to the
execution of an act or contract. In an issue involving
a written act or contract, the fact to be proved is the
existence or the execution of the act or contract itself
and resultantly of the terms thereof, but not the "truth"
of any matter expressed therein. Hence while an
acknowledged document is proof of the contents
thereof, It is not technically speaking evidence of the
facts stated therein for an instrument or a deed does
not in the first place assert facts.

roe instance Gutierrez v. Mondoza-Plaza, 4 December 2009. Also
Lozano v. Ferandez, 18 February 2019

994

Authentication and Proof of Documents

•

How is an official record proved?

A

An official record (the public document referred to in
S19fa] R132) may be evidenced by:
1)

Official publication thereof, or

2)

Copy attested by the officer having the legal
custody of the record or by his deputy and
accompanied, if the record is not kept in the
Philippines, with a certificate that such officer has
the custody.

If the office in which the record is kept is in a
foreign country, which is a contracting party to a treaty
or convention to which the Philippines is also a party,
or considered a public document under such treaty or
convention pursuant to paragraph (c) of Section 19
hereof, the certificate or its equivalent shall be in the
form prescribed by such treaty or convention subject
to reciprocity granted to public documents originating
from the Philippines.219
For documents originating from a foreign country
which is not a contracting party to a treaty or
convention referred to in the next preceding sentence,
the certificate may be made by a secretary of the
embassy or legation, consul general, consul, viceconsul, or consular agent or by any officer in the
foreign service of the Philippines stationed in the
foreign country in which the record is kept, and
authenticated by the seal of his or her office.
A document that is accompanied by a certificate
or its equivalent may be presented in evidence
without further proof, the certificate or its equivalent
being prima facie evidence of the due execution and

---

-----

"see te Apostille Convention on Authentication
mentioned under $19 R132

995

of Documents

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
genuineness of the document involved. The certificate

shall not be required when a treaty or convention
between a foreign country and the Philippines has
abolished the requirement, or has exempted tho
document itself from this formality. (24a)
0.

Petitioner Redante first married Maria Socorro in

1984. He then contracted a second marriage with
Fe Aguila, the private complainant, in 1998.
Charged with bigamy, Petitioner presented in
evidence a Certificate of Divorce allegedly issued
by the registrar of the Supreme Court of British
Columbia, Canada, on 14 January 2008 certifying
that Petitioner and Maria Socorro were divorced in
Canada in 1988, ls the certificate sufficient to
absolve Petitioner from liability?

A.

No. First, the certificate of divorce is not the divorce
decree required by the rules and jurisprudence. The
divorce decree required to prove the fact of divorce is
the judgment itself as rendered by the foreign court
and not a mere certification. Second, assuming the
certifcate of divorce may be considered as the divorce
decree, it was not accompanied by a certification
issued by the proper Philippine diplomatic or consular
officer stationed in Canada, as required under S24
R132. Lastly, no copy of the alleged Canadian law was
presented by the defense. Thus. It could not be
reasonably determined whether the subject divorce
decree was in accord with Maria Socorro's national law.
Further, since neither the divorce decree nor the
alleged Canadian law was satisfactorily demonstrated,
the type of divorce supposedly secured by Maria
Socorro -whether an absolute divorce which terminates
the marriage or a limited divorce which merely
suspends it -and whether such divorce capacitated

996

Authentication and Proof of Documents

her to remarry could not also be ascertained. As such,
Redante failed to prove his defense that he had the
capacity to remarry when he contracted a subsequent
marriage to Fe. His liability for bigamy is therefore
beyond question. (Sarto v. People, 28 February 2018,
Martlres, J.).
Q.

The corporate auditor of the Commission on Audit
(COA) issued a certification that the COA had
concurred in the engagement of a private lawyer
by the Home Development Mutual Fund (HDMF).
No copy of the COA concurrence was attached to
the certification. Is the certification proof of the
COA's concurrence?

A.

No. First, the certification did not comply with S25
which states that the attestation must state that the
copy is a correct copy of the original, the reason being
that no copy of the concurrence was attached to the
certification, Second, even if we were to consider the
certification as a copy of the original, there was no
showing that the corporate auditor was the legal
custodian of the COA records who was authorized to
make the attestation under S24 & 25 R132. (HDMF
Sagun, 31 July 2018, Bersamin, J.).

0.

Petitioner filed a petition for recognition of a
Japanese Divorce Decree. In order to prove the
Japanese law on divorce, she offered a photocopy
of excerpts from the Civil Code of Japan which was
stamped "LIBRARY, EMBASSY OF JAPAN." 1s
the photocopy proof of the Japanese divorce law?

A.

No. The certification must comply with S24 & 25
R132. Here the certification did not comply with S24
R132 since the copy was not attested by the o'ficer
having the legal custody of the record and
accompanied with a certificate that such officer has

997

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
the custody. Nor did it comply with S25 R132 since

there was no attestation that the copy is a correct
copy of the original. (Nullada v. Ito, 23 January 2019,
Reyes, J.)

0.

ls an English translation of the Japanese Civil
Code exempted from the hearsay rule as a learned

treatise or as an official record?
A.

No. The RTC did not take judicial notice of the
translator's and advisors' qualifications. Nor was an
expert witness presented to testify on this matter. The

only evidence of the translator's and advisors'
credentials is the inside cover page of the English
translation of the Civil Code.
Nor may it be considered an official publication of
an official record since the translation was published
by a private Japanese company. (Arreza v. Toyo, 1
July 2019, Leonen, J.).
Q.

Nustad, a Norwegian citizen and resident, sued
Tujan-Militante for delivery of certificates of title in
the name of Nustad which the suit alleged defendant
was unlawfully withholding from Nustad. Nustad
was represented by Atty. Lucila, whom Nus tad
had authorized to bring suit in her behalf by way
of an SPA executed in Norway and acknowledged
before a notary public therein. Tujan-Militante
argued that It was Improper for the court to take
into account the SPA on the ground that it was
not certified by a foreign service officer as
required under S24 R132. Is Tujan-Militante's
challenge meritorious?

998

Authentication and Proof of Documents

A.

No. S24 R132 (proof of official record) applies only to
S19(a) not to (b) and (c) of R132. Hence an SPA
notarized abroad does not need a consular certification
for it to be admitted in evidence. (Tujan-Militante
Nustad, 19 June 2017, Tijam, J; Heirs of Arcila
l v
Teodoro, 11 August 2008, Austria-Martinez, J)

Q.

How is a public record of a private document
proved?

A.

An authorized public record of a private document
may be proved by:
1)

Original record, or

2)

Copy attested by the legal custodian of the
record, with an appropriate certificate that such
officer has the custody. (S27 R132)

Q.

What must the attestation of a copy state?

A.

Whenever a copy of a document or record is attested
for the purpose of evidence, the attestation must
state, in substance, that the copy is a correct copy of
the original, or a specific part thereof, as the case
may be, The attestation must be under the official
seal of the attesting officer, if there be any, or if he be
the clerk of a court having a seal, under the seal of
such court. (S25 R132).

Q.

Respondent offerod in evidence Exhibit H, e
photocopy of a deed of sale. On the photocopy is
a stamped notation signed by an assessment
officer in the local assessor's office which states
that the photocopy is a "certified true xerox
copy." The petitioner objected to the offer on the
ground that It violates the best evidence rule but
the trial court overruled the objection an
admitted the photocopy. Was the admission of the
photocopy in evidence proper?
999

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
A.

No, on two grounds.

First the attestation made by the assessment
officer is defective for it did not state "that the copy is

a correct copy of the original." (See S25 R132).
Second the assessor's office is not the official

repository of original notarized deeds of sale and
could not have been the legal custodian contemplated
in S27 R132. It is the notary public or the proper court

that has custody of his notarial register that could
have produced the original or a certified true copy
thereof. (Heirs of Gabatan v. Court of Appeals, G.R.
No. 150206, 13 March 2009).
Q.

May a public record be removed from the office in
which it is kept?

A.

No, except upon order of a court where the inspection
of the record is essential to the just determination of a

pending case, (S26 R132)
Q.

How is the lack of an official record proved?

A.

The lack of an official record is proved by a written
statement signed by an officer having the custody of
an official record or his deputy that after diligent
search, no record or entry of a specified tenor is found
to exist in the records of his office, accompanied by a
certificate that such officer has the custody of official

records. (S28 R132)
Q.

Petitioner Syed Azhar Abbas (Syed) filed a petition
for the declaration of nullity of his marriage to
Gloria Goo Abbas (Gloria) with the RTC of Pasay
City. Syed alleged the absence of a marriage
license as a ground for the annulment of his
marriage to Gloria. In the Marriage Contrace of
Gloria and Syed, it is stated that Marriage License
No. 9969967, issued at Carmona, Cavite on January

1000

Authentication and Proof of Documents

8, 1993, was presented to the solemnizing officer,
Syed offered in evidence the certification of the
Municipal Civil Registrar to the effect that the
marriage license number appearing in the marriage
contract he submitted, Marriage License No.
9969967, was the number of another marriage
license issued to a certain Arlindo Getalado and
Myra Mabilangan. Said certification reads as follows:
11 July 2003
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
This ls to certify as per Registry Records of
Marriage License filed in this office, Marriage
License No. 9969967 was issued in favor of MR.

ARLINDO GETALADO and MISS MYRA MABILANGAN
on January 19, 1993.
No Marriage License appear [sic] to have been
issued to MR. SYED AZHAR ABBAS and MISS
GLORIA F. GOO on January 8, 1993. This
certification is being issued to Mr. Syed Azhar Abbas
for whatever legal purpose or intents it may serve.
On cross-examination, Syed testified that
Gloria had filed bigamy cases against him in 2001

and 2002, and that ho had gone to the Municipal
Civil Registrar of Carmona, Cavite to get
certification on whether or not there was a
marriage license on advice of his counsel, The
RTC, relying upon the certification, nullified the
marriage but on appeal the Court of Appeals
reversed, stating that the certification of the
Municipal Civil Registrar failed to categorically
state that a diligent search for the marriage
license of Gloria and Syed was conducted

1001

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

as required by $828 R132 and thus held that
said certification could not be accorded probative
value. Was the certification of the MCR adequate to
prove the non-issuance of the marriage license?
A.

Yes, the certification of the Local Civil Registrar that
their office had no record of a marriage license was
adequate to prove the non-Issuance of said license.
The presumed validity of the marriage of the parties
had been overcome, and thus it became the burden
of the party alleging a valid marriage to prove that the
marrlage was valid, and that the required marriage
license had been secured. The certification need not
state that a diligent search was made because of the
presumption that official duty has been regularly
performed. Besides the fact that the MCR stated that
license no. 9969967 was issued to another couple
shows that she undertook a diligent search. The fact
that the names in said license do not correspond to
those of Gloria and Syed does not overturn the
presumption that the registrar conducted a diligent
search of the records of her office. (Abbas v. Abbas,
30 January 2013, Velasco, 4.; see also Morimoto v.
Morimoto, 15 March 2021, Leonen, 4.).

0.

Upon complaint of Alice, Norberto was charged
with bigamy committed by contracting a second
marriage with Alice while his first marriage with
Gina was subsisting. Norberto argues that the first
element of bigamy is absent in this case. He presents
as evidence a Certification from the Office of the
Civil Registrar of Imus, Cavlte, which states that
the Office has no record of the marriage license
allegedly issued in his favor and his first wife,
Gina. Petitioner presents a Certification from the Office
of the Civil Registrar of Imus, Cavite, which states:

1002

Authentication and Proof of Documents

[A]fter a diligent search on the files of
Registry Book on Application for Marriage License
and License Issuance available in this office, no
record could be found on the alleged issuance of
this office of Marriage License No, 8683519 in
favor of MR. NORBERTO A. VITANGCOL and MS.
GINA M. GAERLAN dated July 17, 1987,
He argues that with no proof of existence of
an essential requisite of marriage-the marriage
license--the prosecution fails to establish the
legality of his first marriage. Does the Certification
from the Office of the Civil Registrar prove that no
marriage license was issued in favor of Norberto
Vitangcol and Gina Gaerlan?
A.

No. This Certification does not prove that petitioner's
first marriage was solemnized without a marriage
license. It does not categorically state that Marriage
License No. 8683519 does not exist

This case should be distinguished from Republic

v. Court of Appeals, 236 SCR~ 257 (1994).

Castro

was originally an action for the declaration of nullity of

a marriage. As part of its evidence, the plaintiff
presented a certification that states that the marriage
license "cannot be located as said license.does
not appear from [the local civil registrar's] records."
The Supreme Court held that "[the certification .
enjoys probative value, [the local civil registrar] being
the officer charged under the law to keep a record of
all data relative to the issuance of a marriage license."
The Supreme Court further said that "[ujnaccompanied
by any circumstance of suspicion and pursuant to
Section 29, Rule 132 of the Rules of Court, a certificate
of 'due search and inability to find' sufficiently proved
that [the local civil registrar] did not issue [a] marra
i ge
license...to the contracting parties."

1003

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
The circumstances in Castro and In this case are
different. Castro involved a civil case for declaration of
nullity of marriage that does not involve the possible
loss of liberty. The certification in Castro was
unaccompanied by any circumstance of suspicion,
there being no prosecution for bigamy involved. On
the other hand, the present case involves a criminal
prosecution for bigamy. This is a circumstance of
suspicion, the Certification having been issued to
Norberto for him to evade conviction for bigamy.
(Vitangcol v. People, 13 January 2016, Leonen, 4.)"
Q.

Petitioner Raquel Kho filed a petition for declaration
of nullity of his marriage with respondent

Veronica Borata. Petitioner was able to present a
certification issued by the Municipal Civil Registrar
of Arteche, Eastern Samar, attesting that the
Office of the Local Civil Registrar "has no record
nor copy of any marriage license ever issued in
favor of Raquel G. Kho [petitioner] and Veronica
M. Borata [respondent] whose marriage was
celebrated on June 1, 1972," ls this adequate
proof that no license was issued regarding the
marriage of Raquel and Veronica?
A.

Yes. It is not required that the certification
categorically state that the license does not exist in
the said office despite diligent search. On the basis of
the certification, the presumed validity of the marriage
of petitioner and respondent has been overcome and

it becomes the burden of respondent to prove that

"?qgagcol may be istinguished from Abbas , Abbas, 30 January 2013,
in that the former inwoived a criminal case for bigamy while Abbas involved a civil
action for nullification of marriage. It is also submitted that the pronouncement In
Vitangco! is only obiter. The ratio decideni of VItangcoi is the setted doctrine
that a person who contracts a second marriage without a judiclal decro of nullity
of the first marriage is guity af bigamy, even if the first marriage really turns out
to be void.

1004

Authentication and Proof of Documents

their marriage is valid as it is she who alleges such
validity. The marriage certificate presented by
respondent does not prove the validity of the marriage
since it did not contain any entry regarding a marriage
license. (Kho v. Republic, 1 June 2016, Peralta, J.).
Q.

May a judicial record be impeached? If so, how?

A.

Yes a judicial record may be impeached by evidence
of (JCF); (a) want of jurisdiction in the court or judicial
officer, (b) collusion between the parties, or (c) fraud
In the party offering the record, in respect of the
proceedings. (S29 R132).

0.

How are acknowledged (notarial) documents proved?

A,

Every instrument duly acknowledged or proved and
certified as provided by law, may be presented in
evidence without further proof, the certificate of
acknowledgment being prima facie evidence of their
execution. (330 R132).

•

Alleging that his signature as seller in a deed of
sale of land was forged, Dela Rama filed an action
for annulment of title against the registered owner
Papa. Papa admitted that he did not see the seller
sign the deed and that he did not appear before
the notary public to acknowledge the deed. The
RTC ruled in favor of Dela Rama but on appeal the
CA reversed. The CA held that since the document
was a public document, then the evidence needed
to prove forgery was clear and convincing
evidence, which Dela Rama failed to muster. Was
the CA's reasoning correct?

A.

No. An improperly notarized deed of sale is not a
public document which carries the presumption of due
execution and authenticity Here Papa did not appear
before the notary to acknowledge the deed of sale.
Hence the evidentiary standard to prove forgery is

1005

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

merely preponderance of evidence, not clear and
convincing evidence. Dela Rama's testimony that his
signature was forged taken with the testimony of
Papa that he did not see Dela Rama sign and that he
(Papa) did not acknowledge the document before the
notary public was sufficient to prove forgery even
without presenting a handwriting expert. (Dela Rama
v. Papa, G.R. No. 142309, 30 January 2009)
Q.

The acknowledgment portion of a real estate
mortgage did not indicate the parson who
appeared before the notary public as the blank for
the name of the person was not filled in. May the
real estate mortgage be considered a public document?

A.

No. Since the real estate mortgage was improperly
notarized, it is not a public document but a private
document which has to be authenticated under S20
R132. (Dycoco v. Orina, G.R. No. 18483, 30 July
2010).

Q.

When will an alteration affect the admissibility of
a document?

A.

An alteration will affect the admissibility of a document

if: (GEM)
(1) The document is being offered as genuine.
(2) The alteration was made after the execution of the

document.
(3) The alteration is in a part material to the question
in dispute. (S31 R132)

1006

Authentication and Proof of Documents

Q.

May an alteration affecting the admissibility of a
document be explained by the proponent?

A. Yes. He may show that the alteration was made by
another, without his consent, or was made with the
consent of the parties affected by it, or was otherwise
properly or innocently made, or that the alteration did
not change the meaning or language of the
instrument. (CAMPI), If he fails to do that, the document
shall not be admissible in evidence. (S31 R132).
Q.

ls a document written in Cebuano admissible in
evidence?

A.

No. Documents written in an unofficial language shall
not be admitted as evidence, unless accompanied
with a translation into English or Filipino

Q.

The trial court took into consideration accused's
extrajudicial confession in Cebuano in convicting
him. On appeal, the accused contends for the first
time that his confession should not have been
received in evidence pursuant to S33 R132. ls the
accused's contention correct?

A.

No. Accused's extrajudicial confession in Cebuano
should have been translated by the official interpreter
of the court or a translation agreed upon by the
parties and both the original and the translation filed.
If S33 R132 were to be strictly observed, the
extrajudicial confession should not have been
admitted by the trial court as evidence for the
prosecution. Nevertheless considering the accused
did not interpose any objection thereto during the trial
and the parties and the judicial personnel appear to
be familiar with Cebuano, the extrajudicial confession
was properly considered by the trial court. (People v
Tonaquin, G.R. No. 133188, 23 July 2004).

1007

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

OFFER AND OBJECTION
Q.

Why is an offer of evidence important?

A.

An offer of evidence is important because the court
shall consider no evidence which has not been
formally offered. (S34 R132).

Q,

Is It required that the purpose for which the
evidence is offered must be specified?

A.

Yes. (S34 R132). The reason is to enable the other
party to object and to enable the court to make an
intelligent ruling. Furthermore, evidence may be
offered for two or more purposes and this necessarily
requires that the purposes be specified.

0.

Certain documents were marked and identified by
a party but not formally offered in evidence. May
the court consider these in rendering its decision?

A.

No. Mere identification of documents and the marking
thereof as exhibits does not confer any evidentiary
weight on the documents unless these are formally
offered. (Hoirs of Cruz-Zamora v. Multiwood International
Inc., 19 January 2009)

0.

When and how is evidence offered?

A

All evidence must be offered orally.
The offer of the testimony_ pf a witness in
evidence must be made at the time the witness is
called to testity.339

cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule, the pariy presenting the
judicial affidavit of his witness in place of direct testimony shall state the purpose
of such testimony at the start of the presentation ot the witness.

1008

Authentication and Proof of Documents

The offer of documentary and object evidence
shall be made after the presentation of a party's
testimonial evidence. ($35 R132, as amended by
the 2020 Rules on Evidence).
CRIMINAL CASES. The offer of evidence, the
comment/objection thereto, and the court ruling shall
be made orally. A party is required to make his/her
oral offer of evidence on the same day after the
presentation of his/her last witness, and the opposing
party is required to immediately interpose his/her oral
comment/objection thereto. Thereafter, the court shall
make a ruling on the offer of evidence in open court.
In making the offer, the counsel shall cite the
specific page numbers of the court record where the
exhibits being offered are found, if attached thereto.
The court shall ensure that all exhibits offered are
submitted to it on the same day of the offer.

f the exhibits are not attached to the record, the
party making the offer must submit the same during
the offer of evidence in open court. (Revised Guidelines
for Continuous Trial of Criminal Cases).
Q

Xand Y were charged with murder, Upon application
of the prosecution, Y was discharged from the
Information to be utilized as a state witness. The
prosecutor presented Y as witness but forgot to
state the purpose of his testimony much less offer
it in evidence. Y testified that he and X conspired
to kill the victim but it was X who actually shot the
victim. The testimony of Y was the only material
evidence establishing the guilt of X.
Y was

cases covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule, upon the termination et
the testimony of ts last witness, a party shall immediately make an oral olfer f
evidence of his documentary or object exhibits, piece by piece, in their
chronological order, stating the purpose or purposes for which he offers the
particular exhibit

1009

pRIMER. REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

thoroughly

cross-examined

by

the

defense

prosecution rested its case, th
counsel. After the

defense filed a demurrer

to evidence based on the

following grounds:
of Y should be excluded
ta) The testimony
was not inita
i lly stat°"
because its purpose
offerod
in
evidence
formally
and it was not
$34 Ri32 Revised Rules 9
required by
Evidence; and

testimony is not admissible against
( Y's
to the rule on res inter allos act

pursuant
to evidence on the
pule on the demurrer

above grounds. (03 Bar Q20ed).

A

Demurrer to evidence denied.
The ground that Y's testimony should be excluded
was not initially stated a0I

(a

because its purpose

offered in evidence as required
was not formally
132 of the Revised Rules
Rule
6y Section 34,
X waived this ground
Evidence is untenable.
raise
it
as
an objection afer'
when he did not
had been called to testify."

9"

that Y's testimony is not admissible
() The ground
to the rule on res inter alIo°
against X pursuant
The res inter alios act@
untenable.
actea is also

le tuner S29 R130 applies only to acts, declarations,

and omissions which are extra-judiciallee Y's testimony was made in court and h
cross-examined as in fact he was cross
eould be
examined by X.

to""

of me 2020 Rules on Evidence, objection
20%4%e s38 R132
of a formal otter must be made as soon a"
tack
tor
witness
a
teetlroon of
witness begins to testy.
1010

Authentication and Proof of Documents

q.

May evidence offered for one purpose be considered
for another?

A.

No. (2FLORENZ D. REGALADO, REMEDIAL LAW
COMPENDIUM 550 {6 rev. ed.] citing People v.
Diano [CA] 66 0.G. 6405)

0.

The Republic filed before the Sandiganbayan (SB)
an action for recovery of ill-gotten wealth against
Disini, a close associate of former President Marcos,
in relation to the Bataan Nuclear Power Plant
project. The Republic offered in evidence against
Disini Exhibit E-9, a tabulation of nuclear power
received by Disini. Disint objected
plant commissions
to the exhibit on the ground that it was not
authenticated. The SB admitted the exhibit as part
of the witness's testimony. May the SB consider
Exhibit 3-9 as proof of the fact stated therein, le.,
the amount of commissions?

A.

No. A document admitted as part of the testimony of a
witness does not constitute proof of the facts stale
therein. It merely forms part of the testimony of the
witness and does not have an independent status
Thus, when the SB admitted Exhibit E-9 as part of the
witness's testimony, it cannot consider the exhibit as
stated therein, i.e., the amount Of
proof of the fact
v. Republic, 15 June 2021, e.b.
(Disini
commissions.
Hernando, J.).

0.

When and how should an objection to evidence
be made?

A.

Objection to offer of evidence must be made orally
immediately after the offer is made
Objection to the testimony of a witness for lack Of
a formal offer must be made as soon as the witness
begins to testify. Objection to a question propounded

1011

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

in the course of the oral examination of a witness
must be made as soon as the grounds therefor
become reasonably apparent.
The grounds for the objections must be specified.
(S36 R132 as amended by the 2020 Rules on
Evidence).
UNDER THE JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE. The
party presenting the judicial affidavit of his witness in

place of direct testimony shall state the purpose of
such testimony at the start of the presentation of the
witness. The adverse party may then move to disqualify
the witness or to strike out his affidavit or any of the
answers found in it on ground of inadmissibility.
Q.

At what point in time should one object to
testimonial evidence?

A.

At two points First immediately after the offer is
made, and second, when an objectionable question is
asked of the witness. Objection must be made
immediately after the offer is made. Objection to a
question propounded in the course of the oral
examination of a witness shall be made as soon as
the ground therefor shall become reasonably apparent.

Q.

After an objectionable question had been asked
by plaintiffs counsel, defendant's counsel immodiately
said, "Objection, your Honor!" Should the judge
sustain the objection?

A.

No S34 R132 requires that the ground for the
objection must be specified.

1012

Authentication and Proof of Documents

Q

What is a specific objection and what is a general
objection?

A.

A specific objection is one which employs a specific
ground therefor, like "hearsay" while a general objection
uses broad or sweeping grounds such as "irrelevant
and incompetent."

Q.

ls a general objection prohibited?

A.

There is no provision in the Rules of Evidence expressly
prohibiting general objections. It is submitted that they
are not prohibited where the evidence is orally
offered. In such a case if the objection is overruled,
the objector must follow up with a specific objection.
If he does not do so, then he cannot assign any error
to the court's ruling.
Where evidence has been offered in writing, a
general objection is improper. Thus a comment/objection
to a written offer of a document on the ground that it is
immaterial, irrelevant, and impertinent" was held to
be a virtual admission of the authenticity of the document
(Dycoco v Orina, G.R. No. 18483, 30 July 2010).

0.

A father (Rolando) filed a petition to fix parental
authority against his wife Melissa. During pre-trial,
Rolando manifested that he would be presenting,
among other witnesses, Dr. Cristina Gates (Gates),
who will testify on the mental status and fitness of
Rolando to exercise parental authority.
At the hearing, Gates was presented as an
expert witness. She confirmed the technical
qualifications and professional skill stated in her
judicial affidavit and curriculum vitae. She also
discussed the findings contained In Rolando's
psychological evaluation report. Applying clinical
hypnosis, phenomenological-existential study and
1013

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

historical-contextual approach, Gates opined that
Rolando could not have molested the minors. As
retrieved from Rolando's memory while under
hypnotic trance, Gates narrated that the children
have accidentally witnessed their parents in the
act of sexual intercourse for several occasions
and explained that this experience caused them to
develop sexual hyperactivity. Gates was then subjected
to cross-examination. But before propounding

any questions, Melissa's counsel, in open court,
moved to strike out the direct testimony of Gates
on grounds that her expertise had not been
established and that any evidence derived from
hypnotically-induced recollection is inadmissible.
Should the motion to strike out be granted?
A.

No. Objection to the witness's qualification as expert
should be timely made. Petitioner Melissa should
have objected during the course of Gates' direct
testimony on her qualifications as an expert witness
and explaining the mechanics of the psychological
examination which she conducted on respondent.
Petitioner should not have waited in ambush after the
expert witness had already finished testifying. (Magsino
v. Magsino, 18 Feb 2019, Reyes, J.).

0.

When may a witness's answer be stricken off the
record?

A.

1) Where a witness answered the question before the
adverse party had the opportunity to voice fully its
objection, and such objection is found to be
meritorious, the court shall sustain the objection and
order the answer given to be stricken off the record
(S39 R132)

1014

Authentication and Proof of Documents

2)

Where a question is not objectionable, but the
answer is not responsive.

3) Where a witness testifies without a question being
posed or testifies beyond limits set by the court.
4)

When the witness does a narration instead of
answering the question.

f such objection is found to be meritorious, the
court shall sustain the objection and order such answer,
testimony or narration to be stricken off the record.
5)

Where the answer is incompetent, irrelevant, or
otherwise improper. (Id.). On proper motion, the
court may also order the striking out of such
answers. This presupposes that the ground for
the objection was not reasonably apparent when
the question was asked but only became so after
the witness had answered.

Q.

When may a continuing objection be made?

A.

When a party has previously objected to a question,
whether sustained or overruled, and succeeding questions
are of the same class as those previously objected to,
it shall not be necessary to repeat the objection, it
being sufficient for the adverse party to record
his continuing objection to such class of questions.
($37 R132)

Q.

When must the court give its ruling upon the
objection?

A.

The ruling of the court must be given immediately
after the objection is made, unless the court desires to
take a reasonable time to inform itself on the question
presented; but the ruling shall always be made during
the trial and at such time as will give the party against
whom it is made an opportunity to meet the situation
presented by the ruling. (S38 R132)
1015

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
In case covered by the Judicial Affidavit Rule, the
court shall promptly rule on the motion to disqualify
the witness or to strike out his affidavit or any of the
answers therein. If granted, the court shall cause the
marking cf any excluded answer by placing it in
brackets under the Initials of an authorized court
personnel, without prejudice to a tender of excluded
evidence under $40 R132
Q.

Should the court state the reason for sustaining
or overruling the objection?

A.

No, the court need not state the reason for sustaining
or overruling an objection, except when the objection
is based on 2 or more grounds in which case a ruling
sustaining the objection must specify the ground/s
relied upon. (S38 R132)

Q.

Counsel A objected to a question posed by
opposing Counsel B on the grounds that it was
hearsay and it assumed a fact not yet established.
The judge banged his gavel and ruled by saying
"Objection Sustained". Can Counsel ask for a
reconsideration of the ruling? Why? (12 Bar
Essay 07a)

A.

Yes Counsel can ask for a reconsideration of the ruling.
Under S38 R132, when the objection is based on
2 or more grounds, a ruling sustaining the objection
must specify the ground/ls relied upon. Here the
court's ruling did not state which of the two grounds it
relied upon in sustaining the objection. Hence the
Counsel can aks for a reconsideration of the ruling.

1016

Authentication and Proof of Documents

0.

What is the remedy of the offeror if the evidence
offered is excluded?

A.

The remedy of the offeror is to avail of the remedy
known as tender of excluded evidence or offer of proof.

If documentary or object evidence is excluded by
the court, the offeror may have the same attached to
pr made part of the record. If the evidence excluded
is oral, the offeror may state for the record the name
and other personal circumstances of the witness and
the substance of the proposed testimony. (S40 R132)

0.

What is the purpose of making a tender of excluded
evidence? What is the consequence lf the offeror
fails to make a tender of excluded evidence?

A.

The purpose of making a tender of excluded evidence
is to allow the appellate court to assess whether the
trial court's exclusion of the evidence is proper. If the
offeror fails to tender excluded evidence, then the
ruling of the trial court excluding the evidence may no
longer be reviewed by the appellate court.

Q.

Viveca brought against her husband Philip (Petitioner)

an action for legal separation and dissolution of
conjugal partnership on the grounds of marital
infidelity and physical abuse. During trial Viveca
moved for the issuance of a subpoena duces
tecum and ad testificandum to Insular Life officers
to compel production of the insurance application
and policy procured by Philip where the beneficiary
was suspected to be Philip's illegitimate child.
The trial court denied the motion on the ground
that under Circular Letter No, 11-2000 issued by
the Insurance Commission, insurance companies/
agents are prohibited from divulging confidential
and privileged information pertaining to insurance
policies.
1017

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Viveca fifed a motion for reconsideration but
this was deniod. She filed a petition for certiorari
under R65 with the Court of Appeals. In the trial
court, she filed her formal offer of rebuttal
exhibits with tender of excluded evidence on the
insurance policy and application, Philip argues

that Viveca's tender of excluded evidence mooted

her R65 petition.
a) Was the R65 petition of Viveca rendered moot
and academic when she made a tender of
excluded evidence before the trial court?
b) Are the contents of an insurance policy and
application confidential and privileged?
A.

a)

No the R65 petition of Viveca was not rendered

moot and academic when she made a tender of excluded
evidence before the trial court.
Under S40 R132 before tender of excluded
evidence may be made the evidence must be formally
offered to the court and denied admission by it

Here the Insurance policy and application were
not formally offered to the trial court since their
production was at the outset prevented by the denial
of the application for subpoena duces tecum. Hence
the tender of excluded evidence was not an adequate
remedy which precluded or mooted the petition
for certiorari.

b) No the contents of an insurance policy and application
are not privileged and confidential.

The Insurance Commission itself has issued an
opinion that Circular Letter No. 11-2000 was not
designed to obstruct lawful court orders. (Yu v. CA,
G.R. 154115, 29 Nov 05).

1018

RULE 133. WEIGHT AND SUFFICIENCY
OF EVIDENCE
0.

What is quantum of evidence?

A.

Quantum of evidence is the weight of evidence
required to discharge the burden of proof,

Q.

In civil cases, what is the quantum of evidence?

A.

In civil cases, the party having the burden of proof
must establish his case by preponderance of evidence.
Preponderance of evidence means that the evidence
adduced by one side is, as a whole, superior to or has
greater weight than that of the other.

0.

What factors may the court consider in determining
where the preponderance of evidence on the
issues involved lies?

A.
a)

All the facts and circumstances of the case,

b) The witnesses' manner of testifying, their intelligence,
their means and opportunity of knowing the facts
to which they are testifying, the nature of the facts
to which they testify, the probability or Improbability
of their testimony, their interest or want of interest,

and also their personal credibility so far as the
same may legitimately appear upon the trial;

c) The number of witnesses, though the preponderance
of evidence is not necessarily with the greater
number. (S1 R133)

1019

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

0.

What is the quantum of evidence in cases before
administrative or quasi-judicial bodies?

A,

In cases filed before administrative or quasi-judicial
bodies, a fact may be deemed established if it is
supported by substantial evidence, or that amount of
relevant evidence which a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to justify a conclusion. (S5 R133).
Substantial evidence is defined as such amount of
relevant evidence which a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to support a conclusion, It is more
than a mere scintilla of evidence. The standard of
substantial evidence is satisfied when there is a
reasonable ground to believe, based on the evidence
submitted, that the respondent is responsible for the

misconduct complained of. It need not be overwhelming

or preponderant, as is required in an ordinary civil
case, or evidence beyond reasonable doubt, as is
required in criminal cases, but the evidence must be
enough for a reasonable mind to support a
conclusion. (Ombudsman v. Mallari, G.R. No. 183161,
3 December 2014)
Q.

In criminal cases, what is the quantum of
evidence needed to convict the accused?

A.

In criminal cases, the quantum of evidence needed
for conviction is proof beyond reasonable doubt. An
accused is entitled to an acquittal unless his guilt is
shown beyond reasonable doubt. (S2 R133).

Q.

What is proof beyond reasonable doubt?

A.

Proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean such
a degree of proof as, excluding possibility of error,
produces absolute certainty. Moral certainty only is
required, or that degree of proof which produces
conviction in an unprejudiced mind. ($2 R132)

1020

Rule 133
Weight and Sufficiency of Evidence

Q.

What is circumstantial evidence?
cases is it sufficlent for conviction?

In

criminal

A.

Circumstantial evidence is that which proves the fact
in issue by way of inference or presumption, unlike
direct evidence which proves the fact in issue without
the aid of any inference or presumption.
Circumstantial evidence is sufficient for conviction if:
a)

There is more than one circumstance;

b)

The facts from which the inferences are derived
are proven; and

c)

The combination of all the circumstances is such
as to produce a conviction beyond reasonable
doubt. (S4 R133).

Inferences cannot be based on other inferences.
Q.

What is the weight to be given the opinion of an
expert witness?

A.

In any case where the opinion of an expert witness is
received in evidence, the court has a wide latitude of
discretion in determining the weight to be given to
such opinion, and for that purpose may consider the
following:
(a) Whether the opinion is based upon sufficient facts
or data;

(b) Whether it is the product of reliable principles and
methods;
(c) Whether the witness has applied the principles
and methods reliably to the facts of the case; and

(d) Such other factors as the court may deem helpful
to make such determination. (S5 R133\°
rte is a new provision added in the 2020 Rules on Evicence

1021

RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CASES
(A.M. NO. 09-6-8-SC)
0.

Give the scope and applicability of the Rules of
Procedure for Environmental Cases (RPEC).

A,

These Rules shall govem the procedure in civil, criminal
and special civil actions before the Regional Trial

Courts, Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal Trial Courts
in Cities, Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial
Courts involving enforcement or violations of environmental
and other related laws, rules and regulations.
Q.

Who may file a civil action involving the enforcement
or violation of any environmental law?

A.

Any real party in interest, including the government
and juridical entities authorized by law, may file such
action. A citizen suit may also be filed by any Filipino
citizen in representation of others, including minors or
generations yet unborn, to enforce rights or obligations

under environmental laws.
Q.

May a court issue a TRO or a writ of preliminary
injunction against lawful actions of government
agencies that enforce environmental laws or prevent
violations thereof?

A.

No.

Q.

What pleadings are allowed under the RPEC?

A.

The pleadings and motions that may be filed are

No court may issue such a TRO or writ of
preliminary injunction except for the Supreme Court.

complaint, answer which may include compulsory
counterclaim and cross-claim, motion for intervention,
motion for discovery and motion for reconsideration of
the judgment.

1022

Rules of Procedure for

Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-$SC)
Motion for postponement, motion for new trial
and petition for relief from judgment shall be allowed
In highly meritorious cases or to prevent a manifest
miscarriage of justice.
Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings and motions?

A.

The following pleadings or motions shall not be
allowed: (4M (d bed) RRT)

(a) Motion to dismiss the complaint;
(b) Motion for a bill of particulars;
(c) Motion for extension of time to file pleadings,
except to file answer, the extension not to exceed
fifteen (15) days;
(d) Motion to declare the defendant in default;
(e) Reply and rejoinder, and
(f) Third party complaint.

O.

Within what time should tho defendant answer the
complaint?

A.

Within fifteen (15) days from receipt of summons, the
defendant shall file a verified answer to the complaint
and serve a copy thereof on the plaintiff. The defendant
shall attach affidavits of witnesses, reports, studies of
experts and all evidence in support of the defense.
(S14)

Q.

Are affirmative and special defenses not pleaded
in the answer deemed waived?

A.

Yes. Affirmative and special defenses not pleaded
shall be deemed waived, except lack of jurisdiction
(S14)

1023

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What Is the effect If cross-claims and compulsory
counterclaims are not asserted in the answer?

A.

Cross-claims and compulsory counterclaims not asserted
shall be considered barred (S14)

Q.

Within what time should counterclaims and crossclaims be answered?

A.

The answer to counterclaims or cross-claims shall be
filed and served within ten (10) days from service of
the answer in which they are pleaded. (S14)

Q.

What is the effect if the defendant fails to answer
the complaint within the period provided?

A.

Should the defendant fail to answer the complaint
within the period provided, the court shall declare
defendant in default and upon motion of the plaintiff,
shall receive evidence ex parte and render judgment
based thereon and the reliefs prayed for, (S15).

0.

When shall the court issue the notice of pre-trial?
When shall the pre-trial be held?

A.

Within two (2) days from the fling of the answer to the
counterclaim or cross-claim, if any, the branch clerk of
court snall issue a notice of the pre-trial to be held not later
than one (1) month from the filing of the last pleading.

The court shall schedule the pre-trial and set as
many pre-trial conferences as may be necessary
within a period of two (2) months counted from the
date of the first pre-trial conference.
Q.

Shall the case be referred to mediation?

A.

Yes. At the start of the pre-trial conference, the court
shall inquire from the parties if they have settled the
dispute, otherwise, tho court shall immediately refer
the parties or their counsel, if authorized by their

1024

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

clients, to the Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) unit
for purposes of mediation. If not available, the court
shall refer the case to the clerk of court or legal
researcher for mediation,
Mediation rnust be conducted within a nonextendible period of thirty (30) days from receipt of
notice of referral to mediation.
The mediation report must be submitted within
ten (10) days from the expiration of the 30-day period.
Q.

A.

When may a preliminary conference be conducted?
What are the purposes of the pre-trial conference?
If

mediation

fails,

the

court

will

schedule

the

continuance of the pre-trial. Before the scheduled

date of continuance, the court may refer the case to
the branch clerk of court for a preliminary conference
for the following purposes:
(a) To assist the parties in reaching a settlement;
(b) To mark the documents or exhibits to be presented
by the parties and copies thereof to be attached
to the records after comparison with the originals;
(c) To ascertain from the parties the undisputed facts
and admissions on the genuineness and due
execution of the documents marked as exhibits;
(d) To require the parties to submit the depositions
taken under Rule 23 of the Rules of Court, the
answers to written interrogatories under Rule 25,
and the answers to request for admissions by the
adverse party under Rule 26;
(e) To require the production of documents or things
requested by a party under Rule 27 and the
results of the physical and mental examination of
persons under Rule 28;
1025

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(f) To consider such other matters as may aid In its
prompt disposition;

(g)

To record the proceedings in the "Minutes of
Preliminary Conference" to be signed by both

parties or their counsels;
(h) To mark the affidavits of witnesses which shall be
In question and answer form and shall constitute
the direct examination of the witnesses; and

(i) To attach the minutes together with the marked
exhibits before the pre-trial proper.

The parties or their counsel must submit to the
branch clerk of court the names, addresses and
contact numbers of the affiants.
During the preliminary conference, the branch
clerk of court shall also require the parties to submit
the depositions taken under Rule 23 of the Rules of
Court, the answers to written interrogatories under
Rule 25 and the answers to request for admissions by
the adverse party under Rule 26. The branch clerk of
court may also require the production of documents or
things requested by a party under Rule 27 and the
results of the physical and mental examination of
persons under Rule 28.
Q.

Describe in brief the duty of the judge during the
pre-trial conference.

A.

The judge shall put the parties and their counsels
under oath, and they shall remain under oath in all
pre-trial conferences.
The judge shall exert best efforts to persuade the
parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute. The
judge may issue a consent decree approving the

1026

Rules of Procedure for

Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

agreement between the parties in accordance with
law, morals, public order and public policy to protect
the right of the people to a balanced and healthful
ecology.
Q.

What is a consent decree?

A.,

Consent decree refers to a judicially-approved settlement
between concerned parties based on public interest
and public policy to protect and preserve the
environment.

0.

What is the offect if evidence is not presented
during the pro-trial?

A.

Evidence not presented during the pre-trial, except
newly-discovered evidence, shall be deemed waived.

Q

What is an environmental protection order?

A

Environmental protection order (EPO) refers to an
order issued by the court directing or enjoining any
person or government agency to perform or desist
from performing an act in order to protect, preserve or
rehabilitate the environment.

Q

When may a temporary environmental protection
order (TEPO) be Issued?

A

If it appears from the verified complaint with a prayer
for the issuance of an Environmental Protection Order
(EPO) that the matter Is of extreme urgency and the
applicant will suffer grave injustice and irreparable
injury, the executive judge of the multiplesala court
before raffle or the presiding judge of a single-sala
court as the case may be, may issue ex parte a TEPO
effective for only seventy-two (72) hours from date of
the receipt of the TEPO by the party or person enjoined.

1027

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Within said period, the court where the case is

assigned, shall conduct a summary hearing to determine
whether the TEPO may be extended until the
termination of the case.
The court where the case is assigned, shall
periodically monitor the existence of acts that are the
subject matter of the TEPO even if issued by the
executive judge, and may lift the same at any time as
circumstances may warrant.
Q.

Isa bond required for the issuance of a TEPO?

A,

No, the applicant shall be exempted from the posting
of a bond for the issuance of a TEPO.

0.

What are the reliefs that may be granted in a
citizen suit?

A.

If warranted, the court may grant to the plaintiff proper
reliefs which shall include the protection, preservation
or rehabilitation of the environment and the payment
of attorney's fees, costs of suit and other litigation
expenses. It may also require the violator to submit a
program of rehabilitation or restoration of the
environment, the costs of which shall be borne by the
violator, or to contribute to a special trust fund for that
purpose subject to the control of the court.

Q.

ls a judgment directing the performance of acts
for the protection, preservation or rehabilitation of
the environment executory pending appeal?

A.

Yes, unless restrained by the appellate court.

1028

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)
Q.

When may a permanent EPO or a writ of continuing
mandamus be issued?

A.

In the judgment, the court may convert the TEPO to a
permanent EPO or issue a writ of continuing
mandamus directing the performance of acts which
shall be effective until the judgment is fully satisfied.

Q.

What steps may be taken to monitor the execution
of the judgment?

A.

The court may, by Itself or through the appropriate
government agency, monitor the execution of the
judgment and require the party concerned to submit
written reports on a quarterly basis or sooner as may
be necessary, detailing the progress of the execution
and satisfaction of the judgment. The other party may,
at its option, submit its comments or observations on
the execution of the judgment

0.

Define a strategic lawsuit against public participation
or SLAPP.

A.

A legal action filed to harass, vex, exert undue
pressure or stifle any legal recourse that any person,
institution or the government has taken or may take in
the enforcement of environmental laws, protection of
the environment or assertion of environmental rights.

Q.

May the defense that the case is a SLAPP be
interposed by the defendant? If so, how should
the defense be alleged?

A.

In a SLAPP filed against a person involved in the
enforcement of environmental laws, protection of the
environment, or assertion of environmental rights, the
defendant may file an answer interposing as a defense
that the case is a SLAPP and shall be supported by

1029

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

documents, affidavits, papers and other evidence;
and, by way of counterclaim, pray for damages.
attorney's fees and costs of suit.
Q.

If a SLAPP defense is alleged in the answer, what
shall the court do?

A,

The court shall direct the plaintiff or adverse party to

file an opposition showing the suit is not a SLAPP,
attaching evidence In support thereof, within a non-

extendible period of five (5) days from receipt of
notice that an answer has been filed.
The defense of a SLAPP shall be set for hearing
by the court after issuance of the order to file an
opposition within fifteen (15) days from filing of the

comment or the lapse of the period.

0.

What is the nature of the hearing on the SLAPP
defense? What is the quantum of evidence In the
SLAPP hearing?

A.

The hearing on the defense of a SLAPP shall be
summary In nature. The parties must submit all available
evidence in support of their respective positions. The
party seeking the dismissal of the case must prove by
substantialevidence that his acts for the enforcement
of environmental law ls a legitimate action for the

protection, preservation and rehabilitation of the
environment. The party filing the action assailed as a
SLAPP shall prove by preponderance of evidence
that the action is not a SLAPP and is a valid claim.
Q.

How shall the court resolve the SLAPP defense?

A,

The affirmative defense of a SLAPP shall be resolved
within thirty (30) days after the summary hearing. If
the court dismisses the action, the court may award

1030

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

damages, attorney's fees and costs of suit under a
counterclaim if such has been filed. The dismissal
shall be with prejudice.

lf the court rejects the defense of a SLAPP, the
evidence adduced during the summary hearing shall
be treated as evidence of the parties on the merits of
the case. The action shall proceed in accordance with

the Rules of Court.
Q.

FCF Mineral Corporation (FCF Mineral) is a domestic
mining corporation engaged in mining at Quezon,
Nueva Vizcaya. In 2012, Joseph Lunag, et al.
(Lunag, et al.), filed against FCF Mineral a petition
for Issuance of the Writ of Kalikasan with Prayer
for the Issuance of Environment Protection Order
and Writ of Continuing Mandamus before the
Supreme Court. Lunag, et al. claimed that openpit mining will destroy their ancestral land.

The SC issued a Writ of Kalikasan but held in
abeyance the issuance of the Temporary Environment
Protection Order. The case was then referred to
the Court of Appeals (CA) for the acceptance of
the writ, hearing, reception of evidence, and rendition
of judgment.
In Its return, FCF Mineral alleged that the
petition filed against it was a Strategic Lawsuit
Against Public Participation (SLAPP), The CA
dismissed the petition, ruling that Lunag, et al. did
not file the petition due to genuine concern for the
environment, but for self-serving reasons. It cited
their admission that they are small-scale miners
who operated within the contract area without
permit. Nevertheless, the CA denied FCF Mineral's
prayer for actual and exemplary damages for
lack of basis.

1031

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
FCF Mineral appealed to the SC, arguing that
it is entitled to actual damages and attorney's fees
of Pf0 million. FCF Mineral cites Rule 6, Section 4
of the Rules of Procedure for Environmental Cases
which allows the award of damages, attorney's
fees, and costs of suit when the case ls dismissed
for being a SLAPP. ls the petition for Writ of
Kalikasan filed against FCF Mineral a SLAPP
which would entitle FCF Mineral to damages?

A.

No. A SLAP refers to suits filed against private
individuals as a retaliation to the latter's recourse to

the government on an issue of public concern. SLAPP
actions do not forward any genuine cognizable
interest but are only used to oppose and to suppress
the defendants' political activities.
To resist these types of suits, a counterclaim or
countersuit for damages called a SLAPP-back or antiSLAPP may be instituted by the SLAPP target. Hence,
the remedy of anti-SLAPP cannot be haphazardly
invoked by any defendant in an environmental case.
SLAPP is a defense that may only be invoked by
individuals who became target of litigation due to their
environmental advocacy.
Here, FCF Mineral is not engaged in environmental
advocacy. It is not advocating for the protection,
preservation, and rehabilitation of the environment,
but for the enforcement of its mining grant. The
enforcement of a large mining concession is not
within the political activities protected by an antiSLAPP law. Hence, FCF Mineral cannot invoke the
remedy of an anti-SLAPP. (FCF Minerals Corp. v
Lunag, 15 February 2021, Leonen, J.)

1032

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

Specila Civi Acti
l n
o for the Issuance of a Writ of Kalikasar
Q.

What is a Writ of Kalikasan? What is its nature?

A.

The writ is a remedy available to a natural or junidical
person, entity authorized by law, people's organization,
non-governmental organization, or any public interest
group accredited by or registered with any government
agency, on behalf of persons whose constitutional
right to a balanced and healthful ecology is violated,
or threatened with violation by an unlawful act or
omission of a public official or employee, or private
individual or entity, involving environmental damage of
such magnitude as to prejudice the life, health or property
of inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces.

Q.

Should the petition be verified? What are the
contents of the petition?

A.

The petition should be verified. The verified petition
shall contain the following:
(a) The personal circumstances of the petitioner,

(b) The name and personal circumstances of the respondent
or if the name and personal circumstances are
unknown and uncertain, the respondent may be
described by an assumed appellation;

(c) The environmental law, rule or regulation violated
or threatened to be violated, the act or omission
complained of, and the environmental damage
of such magnitude as to prejudice the life, health
or property of inhabitants In two or more cities
or provinces.
(d) All relevant and material evidence consisting of
the affidavits of witnesses, documentary evidence,
scientific or other expert studies, and if possible,
object evidence;

1033

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(e) The certification of petitioner under oath that: (1)
petitioner has not commenced any action or filed
any claim involving the same issues in any court,
tribunal or quasi-judicial agency, and no such
other action or claim is pending therein; (2) if
there is such other pending action or claim, a
complete statement of its present status; (3) if
petitioner should learn that the same or similar
action or claim has been filed or is pending,
petitioner shall report to the court that fact within
five (5) days therefrom; and
()

The reliefs prayed for which may include a prayer
for the Issuance of a TEPO.

0.

Where shall the petition be filed? ls the petition
subject to the payment of docket fees?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Supreme Court
or with any of the stations of the Court of Appeals.
The petitioner shall be gxempt from the payment
of docket fees.

Q.

When shall the writ issue?

A.

Within three (3) days from the date of filing of the
petition, if the petition is sufficient in form and substance,
the court shall give an order. (a) Issuing the writ; and
(b) requiring the respondent to file a verified return.
The clerk of court shall forthwith issue the writ under
the seal of the court including the issuance of a cease
and desist order and other temporary reliefs effective
until further order

Q.

How is the writ served?

A,

The writ shall be served upon the respondent by a
court officer or any person deputized by the court,
who shall retain a copy on which to make a return of

1034

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No, 09-6-8-SC)

service. In case the writ cannot be served personally,
the rule on substituted service shall apply.
Q.

Does the service of a Writ of Kalikasan ipso facto
enjoin the respondent from doing the act subject
of the petition for a Writ of Kalikasan?

A.

No. Issuance of a Writ of Kalikasan and service upon
respondent requires the latter to file a verified return
within 10 days from service but does not ipso facto
enjoin or restrain the respondent unless a TEPO
(temporary environmental protection order) was issued
(S5 R7, Rules of Procedure in Environmental Cases).

Q.

What is the responsive pleading of the respondent?
Within what period should it be filed and what
should it contain?

A.

The responsive pleading of the respondent is the
verified return. Within a non-extendible period of ten
(10) days after service of the writ, the respondent
shall file a verified return which shall contain all
defenses to show that respondent did not violate or
threaten to violate, or allow the violation of any
environmental law, rule or regulation or commit any
act resulting to environmental damage of such
magnitude as to prejudice the life, health or property
of inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces
The return shall include affidavits of witnesses,
documentary evidence, scientific or other expert
studies, and if possible, object evidence, in support of
the defense of the respondent.

Q.

What is the effect if a defense is not raised in the
return?

A,

All defenses not raised in the return shall be deemed
waived.

1035

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What is the effect of a general denial in the return?

A.

A general denial of allegations in the petition shall be
considered as an admission thereof.

Q.

What are the prohibited pleadings and motions?

A,

The following pleadings and motions are prohibited:

(5M [bed dp] RTCC)
(a) Motion to dismiss;
(b) Motion for extension of time to file return;
(c) Motion for postponement;
(d) Motion for a bill of particulars;
(e) Counterclaim or cross-claim
(f) Third-party complaint;
(g) Reply; and

(h) Motion ta declare respondent In default.
Q.

What are the discovery measures or interim
reliefs that may be availed of by a party?

A.

A party may file a verified motion for the following
reliefs:
(a) OCULAR INSPECTION; ORDER

The

motion must show that an ocular inspection order is
necessary to establish the magnitude of the violation
or the threat as to prejudice the life, health or property
of inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces. It
shall state in detail the place or places to be inspected.
It shall be supported by affidavits of witnesses having

personal knowledge of the violation or threatened
violation of environmental law.

1036

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-$SC)
After hearing, the court may order any person in
possession or control of a designated land or other
property to permit entry for the purpose of inspecting
or photographing the property or any relevant object
or operation thereon,
The order shall specify the person or persons
authorized to make the inspection and the date, time,
place and manner of making the inspection and may
prescribe other conditions to protect the constituti nal
rights of all parties.
(b) PRODUCTION OR INSPECTION OF
DOCUMENTS OR THINGS; ORDER - The motion
must show that a production order is necessary to
establish the magnitude of the violation or the threat
as to prejudice the life, health or property of
inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces.
After hearing, the court may order any person in
possession, custody or control of any designated
documents, papers, books, accounts, letters, photographs,
objects or tangible things, or objects in digitized or
electronic form, which constitute or contain evidence
relevant to the petition or the return, to produce and
permit their inspection, copying or photographing by
or on behalf of the movant.
The production order shall specify the person or
persons authorized to make the production and the
date, time, place and manner of making the inspection
or production and may prescribe other conditions to
protect the constitutional rights of all parties.
Q.

When shall the court render judgment?

A.

Within sixty (60) days from the time the petition is
submitted for decision, the court shall render judgment
granting or denying the privilege of the writ of kaliasan.
k
1037

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

What are the reliefs that may be granted under
the writ?

A.

The reliefs that may be granted under the writ are the
following:
(a) Directing respondent to permanently cease and
desist from committing acts or neglecting the
performance of a duty in violation of environmental
laws resulting in environmental destruction
or damage;
(b) Directing the respondent public official, government

agency, private person or entity to protect, preserve,
rehabilitate or restore the environment;
(c) Directing the respondent public official, government
agency, private person or entity to monitor strict
compliance with the decision and orders of
the court;
(d) Directing the respondent public official, government
agency, or private person or entity lo make
periodic reports on the execution of the final
judgment; and
(e) Such other reliefs which relate to the right of the

people to a balanced and healthful ecology or to
the protection, preservation, rehabilitation or
restoration of the environment, except the award
of damages to individual petitioners.

Q.

Are the above mentioned reliefs exhaustive?

A.

No. The above enumerated reliefs are non-exhaustive.
The reliefs that may be granted under the writ are
broad, comprehensive and non-exclusive. (Paje V.
Casino, G.R. No, 207257, 3 February 2015)

1038

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)
Q.

What is the remedy of an aggrieved party from
the judgment?

A.

Within fifteen (15) days from the date of notice of the
adverse judgment or denial of motion for reconsideration,
any party may appeal to the Suprerne Court under
Rule 45. The appeal may raise questions of fact.

Q.

In July 2012, Rep. Casino, et al. (Casino Group)
filed with the Supreme Court a Petition for Writ of
Kalikasan against RP Energy, Subic Bay Metropolitan
Authority (SBMA), and DENR Secretary Paje
seeking in the main to stop the construction and
operation of a coal-fired power plant in the Subic
Bay Freeport Zone. The SC resolved to issue a
Writ of Kalikasan and to refer the case to the Court of
Appeals for hearing and reception of evidence
and rendition of judgment.
In their Petition for Writ of Kalikasan, the
Casinio Group's allegations, relative to the actual
or threatened violation of the constitutional right
to a balanced and healthful ecology, may be
grouped into two.
The first set of allegations deals with the
actual environmental damage that will occur if the
power plant project is implemented, involving
thermal, air, and water pollution which would
adversely affect the residents of the Provinces of
Bataan and Zambales, particularly the Municipalities
of Subic, Morong and Hermosa, and the City
of Olongapo.

The second set of allegations deals with the
failure to comply with certain laws and rules
governing or relating to the Issuance of an
Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) and
amendments thereto. The Casino Group claims
1039

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

that the ECC was issued in violation of (1) the
DENR rules on the issuance and amendment of an
ECC, particularly, that there was no environmental
Impact assessment (EIA) relative to the first and
second amendments to the subject ECC, (2)
Section 59 of the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act
(IPRA) Law, requiring a certificate precondition
that the project site does not overlap with an
ancestral domain, and (3) Sections 26 and 27 of
the Local Government Code {LGC), requiring
project approval by the concerned sanggunian.
The CA rendered a decision denying the
privilege of the Writ of Kalikasan and the
application for an environment protection order
due to the failure of the Casino Group to prove
that its constitutional right to a balanced and
healthful ecology was violated or threatened.
Howover, the CA resolved to invalidate the ECC
for non-compliance with Section 59 of the IPRA
Law and Sections 26 and 27 of the LGC and in
view of the failure of RP Energy to comply with
the restrictions set forth in the ECC, which
specifically require that "any expansion of the
project beyond the project description or any
change in the activity shall be subject to a new
Environmental Impact Assessment."
Both parties appealed to the SC. There is no
cavil that the Casino Group failed to substantiate
its claims that the construction and operation of
the power plant would cause environmental damage
of the magnitude contemplated under the Writ of
Kalikasan. The critical issue is whether the CA
acted properly in invalidating the ECC In a
proceeding for the issuance of a Writ of Kalikasan.
Can the validity of an ECC be challenged via a
Writ of Kalikasan?

1040

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No, 09-6-8-SC)
A.

No, The proper procedure to question a defect in an
ECC is to follow the DENR appeal process. After
complying with the proper administrative appeal
process, recourse may be made to the courts in
accordance with the doctrine of exhaustion of
administrative remedies.
However, in exceptional cases, a Writ of
Kalikasan may be availed of to challenge defects in
the ECC provided that (1) the defects are causally
linked or reasonably connected to an environmental
damage of the nature and magnitude contemplated
under the Rules on Writ of Kalikasan, and (2) the
case does not violate, or falls under an exception to,
the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies
and/or primary jurisdiction.
As to the claims that the issuance of the ECC
violated the IPRA Law and LGC, the same are not
within the coverage of the Writ of Kalikasan because,
assuming there was non-compliance therewith, no
reasonable connection can be made to an actual or
threatened violation of the right to a balanced and
healthful ecology of the magnitude contemplated
under the Rules. The alleged lack of approval of the
concerned sanggunians over the subject project
would not lead to or is not reasonably connected with
environmental damage but, rather, it is an affront to
the local autonomy of LGUs. Similarly, the alleged
lack of a certificate precondition that the project site
does not overlap with an ancestral domain would not
result in or is not reasonably connected with
environmental damage but, rather, it is an impairment
of the right of Indigenous Cultural Communities/
Indigenous Peoples (ICCs/lPs) to their ancestral

1041

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
domains. These alleged violations could be the subject
of appropriate remedies before the proper administrative

bodies (like the NCIP) or a separate action to compel

compliance before the courts, as the case may be.
The allegation that there was no environmental

impact assessment relative to the first and second
amendments to the subject ECC is however a defect
in the issuance of the ECC that can be reasonably

connected to an environmental damage of the magnitude
contemplated under the Rules. If this were true, then
the implementation of the project can conceivably
actually violate or threaten to vlolate the right to a
healthful and balanced ecology of the inhabitants near
the vicinity of the power plant. Thus, the resolution of

such an issue could conceivably be resolved in a Writ
of Kalikasan case provided that the case does not
violate, or is an exception to the doctrine of
exhaustion of administrative remedies and primary
jurisdiction. Given the extreme urgency of resolving
the issue due to the looming power crisis, this case
may be considered as falling under an exception to
the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies.
Nonetheless, the DENR reasonably exercised its
discretion in requiring an Environmental Performance
Report & Management Plan (EPRMP) and a Project
Description Report (PDR) for the first and second
amendments, respectively. Since what were involved
were only amendments, the existing Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) need only be supplemented
by the EPRMP and the PDR. Through these documents,
which the DENR reviewed, a new EIA was conducted
relative to the proposed project modifications. (Paje v.
Casi/10, G.R. No. 207257, e.b., 3 February 2015, Del
Castillo, J.).

1042

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)
Q.

In December 2010, Alltech Contractors, Inc.
(Alttech) submitted to the Environmental Management
Bureau (EMB) of the DENR a project for the
reclamation of an estimated 203 hectares along
the coast of Parafaque and 432 hectares along
the coast of Las Pinas. In March 2011, the EMB
issued ECC N, CO-1101-0001 over the project.

In

March 2012, Rep. Cynthia A. Villar,
representing 315,849 Las Pifas residents opposing
the proposed project, filed a petition for the
issuance of a writ of kalikasan before the SC. In
asking the Court to enjoin the implementation of
the proposed project, Villar invoked her constituents'
right to a balanced and healthful ecology. Villar
alleged that the proposed project would impede
the flow of the rivers of Las Piiias and Pararaque
which might expose several adjacent barangays to
flooding and endanger its residents
In April 2012, the SC issued the writ against
respondents Alltech, PRA, DENR-EMB, and the
cities of Las Pinas, Paranaque, and Bacoor. The
SC remanded the case to the Court of Appeals
(CA) to accept the return of the writ, and to conduct
the necessary hearing, reception of evidence, and
rendition of judgment.
The CA rendered a decision denying the
petition for lack of merit. The CA ruled that Villar,
though motivated by good faith, failed to support
her claim that the proposed reclamation project
will expose Las Pinas and Paranaque residents to
catastrophic environmental damage.
In her R45 petition, Villar argued that the
issuance of an ECC for the proposed coastal bay
reclamation project is illegal and unlawful because:
(1) Alltech did not prepare the appropriate

1043

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Environmental Impact Assessment study; (2) the

meeting that was conducted supposedly as public
consultation failed to satisfy the strict requirements
of the law; (3) public hearings are mandatory for
the proposed project; (4) a detailed statement of

project alternative to the proposed reclamation
project is a requirement under the law; and (5)
questions relating to financial and technical capabilities
of a proponent are relevant and material to the
issue relating to its ability to implement the

proposed project. ls the extraordinary remedy of a
petition for writ of kalikasan proper to assail the
issuance of ECC No. CO-1101-0001 for Alltech's
proposed project?
A.

No. Administrative appeal, not a petition for a writ of
kalikasan, is the proper remedy in assailing the
irregularity in the ECC's issuance where there is no
causal ink between such irregularity and the actual/
threatened violation of the right to a balanced and
healthful ecology of the magnitude contemplated by
the RPEC, There should be due regard to the doctrine
of exhaustion of administrative remedies. Here, there
is no actual or imminent threat that can be attributed
to the proposed project that would prejudice the life,
health, or property of residents of the cities of Las
Piias and Pararaque. (Villar v. Alltech Contractors,
Inc., 11 May 2021, e.b., Carandang, J.)

0.

In September 2016, Respondent Garganera for
and on his behalf, and in representation of the
People of the Cities of Cebu and Talisay and the
future generations, including tho unborn (respondent)
filed against the petitioner Cebu City Mayor a
petition for writ of kalikasan with prayer for the
issuance of a Temporary Environmental Protection

Order

(TEPO)

before

the

CA.

Respondent

that the continued operation of the lnayawan

1044

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. N. 09-6-8-SC)

landfill causes serious environmental damage which
threatens and violates their right to a balanced
and healthful ecology.
The CA granted a writ of kalikasan, required
petitioner to file a verified return and a summary
hearing was set for the application. In petitioner's
verified return, he alleged that respondent failed
to comply with the condition precedent which
requires 30-day notice to the public officer
concerned prior to the filing of a citizens suit
under R.A. 9003 (Ecological Solid Waste
Management Act) and R.A. 8749 (Phil. Clean Air
Act). Is the 30-day notice under R.A. 9003 and R.A.
8749 a requirement for the filing of a petition for
Writ of Kallkasan?
A.

No. A petition for writ of kalikasan under the RPEC is
a separate and distinct action from R.A. 9003 and
R.A. 8749. A writ of kalikasan is an extraordinary
remedy covering environmental damage of such
magnitude that will prejudice the life, health or property
of inhabitants in two or more cities or provinces. It is
designed for a narrow but special purpose: to accord
a stronger protection for environmental rights, aiming,
among others, to provide a speedy and effective
resolution of a case involving the violation of one's
constitutional right to a healthful and balanced ecology
that transcends political and territorial boundaries,
and to address the potentially exponential nature of
large-scale ecological threats.
Given that the writ of kalikasan is an extraordinary
remedy and the RPEG allows direct action to the SC
and the CA where it is dictated by public welfare, the
prior 30-day notice requirement for citizen suits under
R.A. 9003 and R.A, 8749 is inapplicable. (Osmera v
Garganera, 20 March 2018, e.b., Tijam, J.)

1045

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Writ of Continuing Mandamus

0.

When may a petition for a writ of continuing
mandamus be availed of?

A.

When

any

agency

or

instrumentality

of

the

government or officer thereof unlawfully neglects the

performance of an act which the law specifically
enjoins as a duty resulting from an office, trust or
station in connection with the enforcement or violation
of an environmental law, rule or regulation or a right
therein, or unlawfully excludes another from the use
or enjoyment of such right and there is no other plain,
speedy and adequate remedy in the ordinary course

of law, the person aggrieved thereby may file a
verified petition in the proper court, alleging the facts
with certainty, attaching thereto supporting evidence,
specifying that the petition concerns an environmental

law, rule or regulation, and praying that judgment be
rendered commanding the respondent to do an act or
series of acts until the judgment is fully satisfied, and
to pay damages sustained by the petitioner by reason
of the malicious neglect to perform the duties of the
respondent. under the law, rules or regulations. The
petition shall also contain a sworn certification of nonforum shopping.
Q.

Where may the petition be filed? ls the same
subject to the payment of docket fees?

A.

The petition shall be filed with the Regional Trial Court
exercising jurisdiction over the territory where the
actionable neglect or omission occurred or with the
Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court.
The petitioner shall be pxempt from the payment
of docket fees.

1046

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

0.

When shall the writ issue?

A.

If the petition is sufficient in form and substance, the
court shall issue the writ and require the respondent
to comment on the petition within ten (10) days from
receipt of a copy thereof. Such order shall be served
on the respondents in such manner as the court may
direct, together with a copy of the petition and any
annexes thereto.

Q.

Describe the proceedings after the filing of the
comment.

A.

After the comment is filed or the time for the fling
thereof has expired, the court may hear the case
which shall be summary in nature or require the
parties to submit memoranda. The petition shall be
resolved without delay within sixty (60) days from the
date of the submission of the petition for resolution.

Q.

State the reliefs and the measures the court may
provide in its judgment granting the privilege of
the writ of continuing mandamus.

A.

If warranted, the court shall grant the privilege of the
writ of continuing mandamus requiring respondent to
perform an act or series of acts until the judgment is
fully satisfied and to grant such other reliefs as may
be warranted resulting from the wrongful or illegal
acts of the respondent.
The court shall require the respondent to submit
periodic reports detailing the progress and execution
of the judgment, and the count may, by itself or
through a commissioner or the appropriate government
agency, evaluate and monitor compliance. The
petitioner may submit its comments or observations
on the execution of the judgment.

1047

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
The periodic reports submitted by the respondent

detailing compliance with the judgment shall be contained
in partial returns of the writ. Upon full satisfaction of
the judgment, a final return of the writ shall be
made to the court by the respondent, If the court finds
that the judgment has been fully implemented,
the satisfaction of judgment shall be entered in the
court docket.

Criminal Procedure
Q.

Who may file a criminal complaint for violation of
environmental laws?

A.

Any offended party, peace officer or any public officer
charged with the enforcement of an environmental
law may file a complaint before the proper officer in
accordance with the Rules of Court. (S1 R9 RPEC)
Note: This provision seems to have confounded
the complaint which is filed directly in court under S3
R110 with the complaint for preliminary investigation/
examination under S3[a] R112. Since the complaint is
being filed with the proper officer for preliminary
investigation/examination, it is not required that it
be subscribed by the offended party, peace officer
or public officer

Q.

State the provision on the filing of an information.

A.

An information, charging a person with a violation of
an environmental law and subscribed by the prosecutor,
shall be filed with the Court. (S2 R9 RPEC)

Q.

Is the civil action for the recovery of the civil
liability arising from the offense charged deemed
instituted with the criminal action?

1048

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A,M, No. 09-6-8-SC)

A.

Yes, when a criminal action is instituted, the civil
action for the recovery of civil liability arising from the
offense charged, shall be deemed instituted with the
criminal action unless the complainant waives the civil
action, reserves the right to institute it separately or
institutes the civil action prior to the criminal action.

0.

When should the reservation of the right to
institute the civil action be made?

A.

Unless the civil action has been instituted prior to the
criminal action, the reservation of the right to institute
separately the civil action shall be made during
arraignment.

Q.

Are docket fees required to be paid in case the
civil action for the recovery of the civil liability is
deemed instituted with the criminal action?

A.

No. However in case civil liability is imposed or
damages are awarded, the filing and other legal fees
shall be imposed on said award in accordance with
Rule 141 of the Rules of Court, and the fees shall
constitute a first lien on the judgment award.

Q.

To whom will the damages awarded accrue In
case there is no private offended party?

A.

The damages awarded in cases where there is no
private offended party, less the filing fees, shall accrue
to the funds of the agency charged with the
implementation of the environmental law violated. The
award shall be used for the restoration and
rehabilitation of the environment adversely affected.

Q.

When may a warrantless arrest be lawfully made?

A.

A peace officer or an individual deputized by the
proper government agency may, without a warrant,
arrest a person:
1049

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(a) When, in his presence, the person to be arrested
has committed, is actually committing or is
attempting to commit an offense; or

(b) When an offense has Just been committed, and
he has probable cause to believe based on
personal knowledge of facts or circumstances
that the person to be arrested has committed it.
Individuals deputized by the proper government

agency who are enforcing environmental laws shall
enjoy the presumption of regularity under Section
3(m), Rule 131 of the Rules of Court when effecting
arrests for violations of environmental laws.

Note; Compare with S5 R113 which allows a

private person to make a warrantless arrest.
0.

What is the procedure in the custody and disposition
of seized items?

A.

The custody and disposition of seized items shall be
in accordance with the applicable laws or rules
promulgated by the concerned government agency.
In the absence of such applicable laws or rules,
the following procedure shall be observed:
a) The apprehending officer having initial custody and
control of the seized items, equipment, paraphernalia,
conveyances and instruments shall physically
inventory and whenever practicable, photograph

the same in the presence of the person from
whom such items were seized.
b) Thereafter, the apprehending officer shall submit

to the issuing court the return of the search
warrant within five (5) days from date of seizure
or in case of warrantless arrest, submit within five

1050

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

(5) days from date of seizure, the inventory report,
compliance report, photographs, representative
samples and other pertinent documents to the
public prosecutor for appropriate action.
c)

Upon motion by any interested party, the court
may direct the auction sale of seized items,
equipment, paraphernalia, tools or instruments of
the crime. The court shall, after hearing, fix the
minimum bid price based on the recommendation
of the concerned government agency. The sheriff
shall conduct the auction.

d) The auction sale shall be with notice to the
accused, the person from whom the items were
seized, or the owner thereof and the concerned
government agency.

e)

The notice of auction shall be posted in three
conspicuous places in the city or municipality
where the items, equipment, paraphernalia, tools
or instruments of the crime were seized.

f)

The proceeds shall be held in trust and deposited
with the government depository bank for disposition
according to the judgment.

Q.

Whore is bail filed?

A.

Bail in the amount fixed may be filed with the court
where the case is pending, or in the absence or
unavailability of the judge thereof, with any regional
trial judge, metropolitan trial judge, municipal trial
judge or municipal circuit trial judge in the province,
city or municipality, If the accused is arrested in a
province, city or municipality other than where the
case is pending, ball may also be filed with any
Regional Trial Court of said place, or if no judge

1051

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
thereof is available, with any metropolitan trial judge,

municipal trial judge or municipal circuit trial judge
therein. If the court grants bail, the court may issue a
hold-departure order in appropriate cases.
Q.

What are the duties of the court before granting
the application for bail?

A.

Before granting the application for bail, the judge must
read the information In a language known to and
understood by the accused and require the accused
to sign a written undertaking, as follows:
a) To appear before the court that issued the warrant

of arrest for arraignment purposes on the date
scheduled, and if the accused fails to appear
without justification on the date of arraignment,
accused waives the reading of the information
and authorizes the court to enter a plea of not

guilty on behalf of the accused and to set the
case for trial,
b)

To appear whenever required by the court where
the case is pending; and

c) To waive the right of the accused to be present at
the trial, and upon failure of the accused to appear
without justification and despite due notice, the
trial may proceed in absentia.
Q.

When shall the court set the arraignment?

A.

The court shall set the arraignment of the accused
within fifteen (15) days from the time it acquires
jurisdiction over the accused, with notice to the public
prosecutor and offended party or concerned government
agency that it will entertain plea-bargaining on the
date of the arraignment.

1052

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

0.

What is plea-bargaining?

A.

The process whereby the accused and the prosecutor
in a criminal case work out a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to court approval, It
usually involves the defendant's pleading guilty to a
lesser offense or to only one or some of the counts of
a multi-count indictment in return for a lighter
sentence than that for the graver charge. (Black's Law
Dictionary, 5" ed., 1979)

0.

When shall the court consider plea-bargaining
arrangements? What shall the court do If the
prosecution and offended party or concermed
government agency agree to the plea offered by
the accused?

A.

On the scheduled date of arraignment, the court shall
consider plea-bargaining arrangements. Where the
prosecution and offended party or concerred
government agency agree to the plea offered by the
accused, the court shall:
a)

Issue an order which contains the plea-bargaining
arrived at;

b)

Proceed to receive evidence on the civil aspect of
the case, if any; and

c)

Render and promulgate judgment of conviction,
including the civil liability for damages.

Q.

When shall the court set the pre-trial conference?

A.

After the arraignment, the court shall set the pre-trial
conference within thirty (30) days. It may refer the
case to the branch clerk of court, if warranted, for a
preliminary conference to be set at least three (3)
days prior to the pre-trial.

1053

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Q.

What are the
conference?

A

The preliminary conference shall be for the following

purposes

of

the

preliminary

purposes:

a) To assist the parties in reaching a settlement of
the civil aspect of the case;

b) To mark the documents to be presented as
exhibits;

c) To attach copies thereof to the records after
comparison with the originals;
d) To ascertain from the parties the undisputed facts

and admissions on the genuineness and due
execution of documents marked as exhibits;
e} To consider such other matters as may aid in the
prompt disposition of the case:

f)

To record the proceedings during the preliminary

conference in the Minutes of Preliminary Conference
to be signed by the parties and counsel,

g) To mark the affidavits of witnesses which shall be
in question and answer form and shall constitute
the direct examination of the witnesses; and

h) To attach the Minutes and marked exhibits to the
case record before the pre-trial proper.
The parties or their counsel must submit to the
branch clerk of court the names, addresses and
contact numbers of the affiants.

1054

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)
Q.

What ls the duty of the court during the pre-trial?

A.

During the pre-trial, the court shall:
a) Place the parties and their counsels under oath;
b)

Adopt the minutes of the preliminary conference as
part of the pre-trial proceedings, confirm markings
of exhibits or substituted photocopies and admissions
on the genuineness and due execution of documents,
and list object and testimonial evidence;

c)

Scrutinize the information and the statements in
the affidavits and other documents which form
part of the record of the preliminary investigation
together with other documents identified and
marked as exhibits to determine further admissions
of facts as to:

l The court's territorial jurisdiction relative to the
offense(s) charged;
ii, Qualification of expert witnesses; and
iii. Amount of damages;
d) Define factual and legal issues;
e) Ask parties to agree on the specific trial dates and
adhere to the flow chart determined by the court
which shall contain the time frames for the
different stages of the proceeding up to
promulgation of decision;

f)

Require the parties to submit to the branch clerk

of court the names, addresses and contact
numbers of witnesses that need to be summoned
by subpoena, and

g) Consider modification of order of trial if the accused
admits the charge but interposes a lawful defense.
1055

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Q.

In what form shall the agreements and admissions
made or entered during the pre-trial be?

A.

All agreements or admissions made or entered during
the pre-trial conference shall be reduced in writing
and signed by the accused and counsel; otherwise,

they cannot be used against the accused. The
agreements covering the matters referred to in
Section 1, Rule 118 of the Rules of Court shall be
approved by the court.

0.

In case of conviction and subsidiary liability ls
allowed under the law, how will such subsidiary
liability be enforced?

A.

In case of conviction of the accused and subsidiary
liability is allowed by law, the court may, by motion of
the person entitled to recover under judgment,
enforce such subsidiary liability against a person or
corporation subsidiarily hiable under Article 102 and
Article 103 of the Revised Penal Code.

Evidence
Q

What is the precautionary principle?

A.

It is the principle which states that when human
activities may lead to threats of serious and irreversible
damage to the environment that is scientificaly plausible
but uncertain, the court shall take actions to avoid or
diminish that threat notwithstanding that there is a
lack of full scientific certainty in establishing a causal
ink between human activity and environmental effect.
The constitutional right of the people to a
balanced and healthful ecology shall be given the
benefit of the doubt. The burden of proof is placed on

1056

Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases
(A.M. No. 09-6-8-SC)

the person or persons responsible for the potentially
harmful activity, who will now have to demonstrate
that their actions are not/will not cause harm to the
environment,

The principle addresses the fact that complexities
associated with environmental cases will present
difficulties under the regular rules of procedure.
Overall, the precautionary principle would essentially
aid plaintiffs In establishing cases that would be,
under most circumstances, difficult if not impossible
to prove.
Q.

What are the standards for the application of the
precautionary principle?

A.

In applying the precautionary principle, the following
factors, among others, may be considered: (1) threats
to human life or health; (2) inequity to present or
future generations; or (3) prejudice to the environment
without legal consideration of the environmental rights
of those affected.

Q.

How are photographic, video, and similar evidence
authenticated?

A.

Photographs, videos and similar evidence of events,
acts, transactions of wildlife, wildlife by-products or
derivatives, forest products or mineral resources
subject of a case shall be admissible when
authenticated by the person who took the same, by
some other person present when said evidence was
taken, or by any other person competent to testify on
the accuracy thereof.

1057

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL
Q.

Are entries in official records prima facie evidence
of the facts therein stated?

A,

Yes. Entries in official records made in the
performance of his duty by a public officer of the
Philippines, or by a person in performance of a duty
specially enjoined by law, are prima facie evidence of
the facts therein stated.

1058

APPENDICES

APPENDIX A
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
SUPREME COURT
Manila

JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT RULE
A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC
Whereas, case congestion and delays plague most

courts in cities, given the huge volume of cases filed each
year and the slow and cumbersome adversarial system
that the judiciary has in place;
Whereas, about 40% of criminal cases are dismissed
annually owing to the fact that complainants simply give up
coming to court after repeated postponements;
Whereas, few foreign businessmen take long-term
Investments in the Philippines because its courts are
unable to provide ample and speedy protection to their
investments, keeping its people poor;
Whereas, in order to reduce the time needed for
completing the testimonies of witnesses in cases under
litigation, on February 21, 2012 the Supreme Court
approved for piloting by trial courts in Quezon City the
compulsory use of judicial affidavits in place of the direct
testimonies of witnesses;
Whereas, it is reported that such piloting has quickly
resulted in reducing by about two-thirds the time used for
presenting the testimonies of witnesses, thus speeding up
the hearing and adjudication of cases;
Whereas, the Supreme Court Committee on the
Revision of the Rules of Court, headed by Senior
Associate Justice Antonio T. Carpio, and the Sub1061

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

Committee on

the Revision

of the

Rules on

Civil

Procedure, headed by Associate Justice Roberto A, Abad,
have recommended for adoption a Judicial Affidavit Rule
that will replicate nationwide the success of the Quezon
City experience in the use of judicial affidavits; and

Whereas, the Supreme Court En Banc finds merit in

the recommendation;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Supreme Court En Banc

hereby issues and promulgates the following:

Section 1. Scope. - (a) This Rule shall apply to all
actions, proceedings, and incidents requiring the reception
of evidence before:
(1) The Metropolitan Trial Courts, the Municipal Trial
Courts in Cities, the Municipal Trial Courts, the Municipal
Circuit Trial Courts, and the Shari' a Circuit Courts but shall
not apply to small claims cases under A.M, 08-8-7-SC;
(2) The Regional Trial Courts and the Shari' a District
Courts;
(3) The Sandiganbayan, the Court of Tax Appeals,
the Court of Appeals, and the Shari' a Appellate Courts;
(4) The investigating officers and bodies authorized
by the Supreme Court to receive evidence, including the
Integrated Bar of the Philippine (IBP); and
(5) The special courts and quasi-judicial bodies,
whose rules of procedure are subject to disapproval of the
Supreme Court, insofar as their existing rules of procedure
contravene the provisions of this Rule.

'By virtue of the Supreme Court's authority under Section 5(5), Article VIE
of the 1987 Constitution to disapprove rules of procedure of special courts ara
quasi-judicial bodies

1062

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. N. 12-8-8-SC)

(b) For the purpose of brevity, the above courts,
quasi-judicial bodies, or investigating officers shall be
uniformly referred to here as the "court."

Sec. 2. Submission of Judicial Affidavits and

Exhibits in lieu of direct testimonies. - (a) The parties
shall file with the court and serve on the adverse party,
personally or by licensed courier service, not later than five
days before pre-trial or preliminary conference or the
scheduled hearing with respect to motions and incidents,
the following:
(1) The judiclal affidavits of their witnesses, which shall

take the place of such witnesses' direct testimonies; and
(2) The parties' documentary or object evidence, if
any, which shall be attached to the judicial affidavits and
marked as Exhibits A, B, C, and so on in the case of the
complainant or the plaintiff, and as Exhibits 1, 2, 3, and so
on in the case of the respondent or the defendant.
(b) Should a party or a witness desire to keep the
original document or object evidence in his possession, he
may, after the same has been identified, marked as exhibit,
and authenticated, warrant in his judicial affidavit that the
copy or reproduction attached to such affidavit is a faithful
copy or reproduction of that original, In addition, the party
or witness shall bring the original document or object
evidence for comparison during the preliminary conference
with the attached copy, reproduction, or pictures, failing
which the latter shall not be admitted,
This Is without prejudice to the Introduction of
secondary evidence in place of the original when allowed
by existing rules.
Sec. 3. Contents of Judicial Affidavit. - A judicial
affidavit shall be prepared in the language known to the
witness and, if not in English or Filipino, accompanied by a
translation in English or Filipino, and shall contain the following:
1063

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

(a) The name, age, residence or business address,
and occupation of the witness;

(b) The name and address of the lawyer who
conducts or supervises the examination of the witness and
the place where the examination is being held;
(c) A statement that the witness is answering the
questions asked of him, fully conscious that he does so
under oath, and that he may face criminal liability for false

testimony or perjury;
(d)

Questions

asked

of

the

witness

and

his

corresponding answers, consecutively numbered, that:
(1) Show the circumstances under which the witness
acquired the facts upon which he testifies;
(2) Elicit from him those facts which are relevant to
the issues thet the case presents; and
(3) Identify the attached documentary and object
evidence and establish their authenticity in accordance
with the Rules of Court;

(e) The signature of the witness over his printed
name; and

(f) A jurat with the signature of the notary public who
administers the oath or an officer who is authorized by law

to administer the same.

Sec. 4. Sworn attestation of the lawyer. - (a) The
judicial affiavit shall contain a sworn attestation at the
end, executed by the lawyer who conducted or supervised
the examination of the ·witness, to the effect that:
(1) He faithfully recorded or caused to be recorded
the questions he asked and the corresponding answers

that the witness gave; and
1064

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M No. 12-8-8-SC)
(2) Neither he nor any other person then present or
assisting him coached the witness regarding the latter's
answers.
(b) A false attestation shall subject the lawyer
mentioned to disciplinary action, including disbarment.

Sec. 5. Subpoena. - If the government employee or
official, or the requested witness, who is neither the
witness of the adverse party nor a hostile witness,
unjustifiably declines to execute a judicial affidavit or
refuses without just cause to make the relevant books,
documents, or other things under his control available for
copying, authentication, and eventual production in court,
the requesting party may avall himself of the issuance of a
subpoena ad testificandum or duces tecum under Rule 21
of the Rules of Court. The rules governing the issuance of
a subpoena to the witness in this case shall be the same
as when taking his deposition except that the taking of a
judicial affidavit shall be understood to be ex parte.
Sec. 6. Offer of and objections to testimony in
Judicial affidavit.- The party presenting the judicial affidavit
of his witness in place of direct testimony shall state the
purpose of such testimony at the start of the presentation of
the witness. The adverse party may move to disqualify the
witness or to strike out his affidavit or any of the answers
found in it on ground of inadmissibility. The court shall
promptly rule on the motion and, if granted, shall cause the
marking of any excluded answer by placing it in brackets
under the initials of an authorized court personnel, without
prejudice to a tender of excluded evidence under Section 40
of Rule 132 of the Rules of Court.

Soc. 7. Examination of the witness on his judicial
affidavit. -- The adverse party shall have the right to crossexamine the witness on his judicial affidavit and on the
exhibits attached to the same. The party who presents the
witness may also examine him as on re-direct. In every

1065

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

case, the court shall take active part in examining the
witness to determine his credibility as well as the truth of
his testimony and to elicit the answers that it needs for
resolving the issues.

-

Sec. 8. Oral offer of and objections to exhibits.
(a) Upon the termination of the testimony of his last
witness, a party shall immediately make an oral offer of
evidence of his documentary or object exhibits, piece by
piece, in their chronological order, stating the purposeor
purposes for which he offers the particular exhibit.

(b) After each piece of exhibit is offered, the adverse
party shall state the legal ground for his objection, if any, to
its admission, and the court shall immediately make its
ruling respecting that exhibit.

(c) Since the documentary or object exhibits form part
of the judicial affidavits that describe and authenticate
them, it is sufficient that such exhibits are simply cited by
their markings during the offers, the objections, and the
rulings, dispensing with the description of each exhibit.

Sec. 9. Application of rule to criminal actions. - (a)
This rule shall apply to all criminal actions:
(1) Where the maximum of the imposable penalty
does not exceed six years;
(2) Where the accused agrees to the use of judicial
affidavits, irrespective of the penalty involved; or
(3) With respect to the civil aspect of the actions,
whatever the penalties involved are.
(b) The prosecution shall submit the judicial affidavits
of its witnesses not later than five days before the pre-trial,
serving copies of the same upon the accused. The
complainant or public prosecutor shall attach to the
affidavits such documentary or object evidence as he may
1066

Appendix A
Judicial Affidavit Rule
(A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)

have, marking them as Exhibits A, B, C, and so on. No
further judicial affidavit, documentary, or object evidence
shall be admitted at the trial,
(c) If the accused desires to be heard on his defense
after receipt of the judicial affidavits of the prosecution, he
shall have the option to submit his judicial affidavit as well
as those of his witnesses to the court within ten days from
receipt of such affidavits and serve a copy of each on the
public and private prosecutor, including his documentary
and object evidence previously marked as Exhibits 1, 2, 3,
and so on. These affidavits shall serve as direct
testimonies of the accused and his witnesses when they
appear before the court to testify.
Sec. 10. Effect of non-compliance with the
Judicial Affidavit Rule. - (a) A party who fails to submit
the required judicial affidavits and exhibits on time shall be
deemed to have waived their submission. The court may,
however, allow only once the late submission of the same
provided, the delay is for a valid reason, would not unduly
prejudice the opposing party, and the defaulting party pays
a fine of not less than P1,000 nor more than PS,000, at the
discretion of the court.
(b) The court shall not consider the affidavit of any
witness who fails to appear at the scheduled hearing of the
case as required. Counsel who fails to appear without valid
cause despite notice shall be deemed to have waived his
client's right to confront by cross-examination the
witnesses there present.

(c) The court shall not admit as evidence judicial
affidavits that do not conform to the content requirements
of Section 3 and the attestation requirement of Section 4
above. The court may, however, allow only once the
subsequent submission of the compliant replacement
affidavits before the hearing or trial provided the delay is
for a valid reason and would not unduly prejudice the
1067

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
opposing party and provided further, that public or private
counsel responsible for their preparation and submission
pays a fine of not less than P1,000 nor more than P5,000,
at the discretion of the court.

Sec. 11. Repeal or modification of inconsistent
rules. - The provisions of the Rules of Court and the rules
of procedure governing investigating officers and bodies
authorized by the Supreme Court to receive evidence are
repealed or modified insofar as these are inconsistent with

the provisions of this Rule. The rules of procedure
governing quasi-judicial bodies Inconsistent herewith are
hereby disapproved.

Sec. 12. Effectivity.- This rule shall take effect on
January 1, 2013 following its publication in two newspapers
of general circulation not later than September 15, 2012 It
shall also apply to existing cases.
Manila, September 4, 2012.

1068

APPENDIX B
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
SUPREME COURT
Manila

EFFICIENT USE OF PAPER RULE
A.M. No. 11-9-4-SC

Whereas, to produce 500 reams of paper, twenty
trees are cut and 100,000 liters of water are used, water
that is no longer reusable because it is laden with
chemicals and is just released to the environment to

poison our rivers and seas;
Whereas, there is a need to cut the judicial system's
use of excessive quantities of costly paper, save our
forests, avoid landslides, and mitigate the worsening
effects of climate change that the world Is expenencing;

Whereas, the judiciary can play a big part in saving our
trees, conserving precious water, and helping mother earth;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Supreme Court En Banc

hereby issues and promulgates the following:
Sec, 1, Title of the Rule. - This rule shall be known
and cited as the Efficient Use of Paper Rule.

Sec. 2. Applicability. - This rule shall apply to all
courts and quasi-judicial bodies under the administrative
supervision of the Supreme Court.
Soc. 3. Format and Style. - a) All pleadings, motions,
and similar papers intended for the court and quasi-judicial
body's consideration and action (court-bound papers) shall
be written in single space with a one-and-a-half space
between paragraphs, using an easily readable font style of

1 069

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

the party's choice, of 14-size font, and on a 13-inch by 8.5inch white bond paper; and

b) All decisions, resolutions, and orders issued by courts
and by quasi-Judicial bodies under the administrative
supervision of the Supreme Court shall comply with these
requirements. Similarly covered are the reports submitted to
the courts and transcripts of stenographic notes.
Sec. 4. Margins and Prints. - The parties shall
maintain the following margins on all court-bound papers: a
left hand margin of 1.5 inches from the edge; an upper
margin of 1.2 inches from the edge; a right hand margin of
1.0 inch from the edge; and a lower margin of 1.0 inch from
the edge. Every page must be consecutively numbered.

Sec. 5. Copies to be Filed. - Unless otherwise
directed by the court, the number of court--bound papers
that a party is required or desires to file shall be as follows:
a) In the Supreme Court, one original (properly
marked) and four copies, unless the case is referred to the
Court En Banc, in which event, the parties shall file ten
additional copies. For the En Banc, the parties need to
submit only two sets of annexes, one attached to the
original and an extra copy, For the Division, the parties
need to submit also two sets of annexes, one attached to
the original and an extra copy. AI members of the Court
shall share the extra copies of annexes in the interest of
economy of paper.

Parties to cases before the Supreme Court are further
required, on voluntary basis for the first six months
following the effectivity of this Rule and compulsorily
afterwards unless the period is extended, to submit,
simultaneously with their court-bound papers, soft copies
of the same and their annexes (the latter in PDF format)
either by email to the Court's e-mail address or by compact
1070

Appendix B
Efficient Use Of Paper Rule
(A.M. No. 11-9-4-$C)

disc (CD). This requirement is in preparation for the
eventual establishment of an e-filing paperless system in
the judiciary.
b) In the Court of Appeals and the Sandiganbayan,
one original (properly marked) and two copies with their
annexes;
c) In the Court of Tax Appeals, one original (properly
marked) and two copies with annexes. On appeal to the
En Banc, one original (properly marked) and eight copies
with annexes; and
d) In other courts, one original (properly marked) with
the stated annexes attached to it.

Sec. 6. Annexes Served on Adverse Party. - A
party required by the rules to serve a copy of his courtbound paper on the adverse party need not enclose copies
of those annexes that based on the record of the court
such party already has in his possession, In the event a
party requests a set of the annexes actually filed with the
court, the party who filed the paper shall comply with the
request within five days from receipt.
Sec. 7. Date of Effectivity. -This rule shall take effect

on January 1, 2013 after publication in two newspapers of
general circulation in the Philippines.

Manila, November 13, 2012.

1071

APPENDIX C
REVISED GUIDELINES FOR
CONTINUOUS TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES'
I.

Applicability

The Revisod Guidelines for Continuous Trial of
Criminal Cases (Revised Guidelines) shall apply to all
newly-filed criminal cases, including those governed by
Special Laws and Rules,' in the First and Second Level
Courts, the Sandiganbayan and the Court of Tax Appeals
as of effectivity date, The Revised Guidelines shall also
apply to pending criminal cases with respect to the
remainder of the proceedings.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the
Revised Guidelines shall not apply to criminal cases fiied

under the Rule on Summary Procedure.
II.

Objectives

1) To protect and advance the constitutional right of
persons to a speedy disposition of their criminal cases;
2) To reinforce and give teeth to the existing rules
on criminal procedure and other special rules prescribing
periods for court action and those which promote speedy
disposition of criminal cases; and
3) To introduce innovations and best practices for
the benefit of the parties
References to annexes are omitted
'Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002, Cybercrime Preventicn
Act of 2012, Rules oft Procedure far Environmental Cases, Rules of Procedure for
Intellectual Property Rights Cases and Criminal Cases cognizable by Family
Courts an& Commercial Courts

1072

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous

Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

Ill.

Procedure
1) Hearing Days and Calendar Call

Trial shall be held from Monday to Thursday, and
courts shall call the cases at exactly 8.30 A.M. and 2:00
P.M., pursuant to Administrative Circular No. 3-99. Hearing
on motions, arraignment and pre-trial, and promulgation of
decisions shall be held in the morning of Fridays, pursuant
to Sec, 7, Rule 15 of the Rules of Court.
All courts shall ensure the posting or their court
calendars outside their courtrooms at least one (1) day
before the scheduled hearings, pursuant to OCA Circular

No. 250-2015.
2) Motions
(a) Motion for Inhibition - Motions for inhibition
based on grounds provided for under Rule 137 shall be
resolved immediately or within two (2) calendar days from
date of their filing.
(b) Prohibited Motions -- Prohibited motions shall be
denied outright before the scheduled arraignment without
need of comment and/or opposition.
The following motions are prohibited:

i. Motion for judicial determination of probable cause.
ii. Motion for preliminary investigation filed beyond the
five (5)-day reglementary period in inquest proceedings

under Sec. 6, Rule 112, or when preliminary investigation
is required under Sec. 8, Rule 112, or allowed in inquest
proceedings and the accused faled to participate in the

preliminary investigation despite due notice.

1073

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

iii. Motion for reinvestigation of the prosecutor
recommending the filing of information once the
information has been filed before the court (1) if the
motion Is filed without prior leave of court; (2) when
preliminary investigation is not required under Sec. 8,
Rule 112; and (3) when the regular preliminary

investigation

is

required

and

has

been

actually

conducted, and the grounds relied upon in the motion

are not meritorious, such as issues of credibility,
admissibility of evidence, innocence of the accused, or
lack of due process when the accused was actually
notified, among others.
iv. Motion to quash information when the ground is
not one of those stated In Sec. 3, Rule 117,

v. Motion for bill of particulars that does not conform
to Sec. 9, Rule 116.

vi. Motion to suspend the arraignment based on
grounds not stated under Sec. 11, Rule 116.

vii. Petition to suspend the criminal action on the
ground of prejudicial question, when no civil case has
been filed, pursuant to Sec. 7, Rule 111,
(c) Meritorious Motions -- Motions that allege
plausible grounds supported by relevant documents and/or
competent evidence, except those that are already
covered by the Revised Guidelines, are meritorious
motions, such as:

i, Motion to withdraw information, or to downgrade
the charge in the original information, or to exclude an
accused originally charged therein, filed by the prosecution
as a result of a reinvestigation, reconsideration, and
review,

ii. Motion to quash warrant of arrest;
1074

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous

Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

ii. Motion to suspend arraignment on the ground of an
unsound mental condition under Sec. 11 (a), Rule 116;
iv. Motion to suspend proceedings on the ground of a
prejudicial question where a civil case was filed prior to
the criminal case under Sec. 11 (b), Rule 116;

v. Motion to quash information on the grounds that the
facts charged do not constitute an offense, lack of
jurisdiction, extinction of criminal action or liability, or double
jeopardy under Sec. 3, par. (a), (b), (g) and (), Rule 117;
vi. Motion to discharge accused as a state witness
under Sec. 17, Rule 119;

vii. Motion to quash search warrant under Sec, 14,
Rule 126, or motion to suppress evidence; and
viii. Motion to dismiss on the ground that the criminal
case is a Strategic Law Suit Against Public Participation
(SLAPP) under Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure for
Environmental Cases.
The comment of the adverse party shall be filed within

a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days from
notice/receipt of the order of the court to file the same, and
the court shall resolve the motion within a non-extendible
period of ten (10) calendar days from the expiration of the
ten (10)-day period, with or without comment. The court, at

ts discretion, may set the motion for hearing within a nonextendible period of ten (10) calendar days from the
expiration of the ten (10)-day period to file comment, in
which case the same shall be submitted for resolution after
the termination of the hearing, and shall be resolved within a
non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days thereafter.
Reply and memorandum need not be submitted.
In case of a motion to discharge accused as state
witness under Sec. 17, Rule 119, where the prosecution is
required to present evidence in support thereof, such

1075

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

motion shall be submitted for resolution from the
termination of the hearing, and shall be resolved within a
non-extendible period of ten (10) calendar days thereafter.

The motion for reconsideration of the resolution of a
meritorious motion shall be filed within a non-extendible
period of five (5) calendar days from receipt of such
resolution, and the adverse party shall be given an equal
period of five (5) calendar days from receipt of the motion
for reconsideration within which to submit its comment.
Thereafter, the motion for reconsideration shall be resolved
by the court within a non-extendible period of five (5)
calendar days from the expiration of the five (5)-day period
to submit the comment.

Motions that do not conform to the requirements
stated above shall be considered unmeritorious and shall
be denied outright.
(d) Motion for postponement -- A motion for
postponement is prohibited, except if it is based on acts of
God, force majeure or physical inability of the witness to
appear and testify. If the motion is granted based on such
exceptions, the moving party shall be warned that the
presentation of its evidence must still be finished on the
dates previously agreed upon,
A motion for postponement, whether written or oral,
shall at all times be accompanied by the original official
receipt from the Office of the Clerk of Court evidencing
payment of the postponement fee under Sec. 21 (b), Rule
141, to be submitted either at the time of the filing of said
motion or not later than the next hearing date, The Clerk of
Court shall not accept the motion unless accompanied by
the original receipt
3) Free Legal Assistance
If a party fails to qualify for the availment of the
services of the Public Attorney's Office, the Integrated Bar
1076

Appendix C

Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No 15-06-10-SC)

of the Philippines Local Chapter shall provide free legal
assistance to said party. For this purpose, the IBP Local
Chapter shall submit to the Executive Judges a list of IBPlocal lawyers who may be appointed by the courts to act as
counsel de officio in such cases, The lists shall be
disseminated among all the trial courts in the station.

4) Private Prosecutor
In cases where only the civil liability is being
prosecuted by a private prosecutor, the head of the
prosecution office must issue in favor of the private
prosecutor a written authority to try the case even in the
absence of the public prosecutor. The written authority
must be submitted to the court prior to the presentation of
evidence by the private prosecutor in accordance with Sec.
5, Rule 110,
With this authority on record, the court may set the
trial in the case and in other cases tried by private
prosecutor with delegated authority on separate days
when the presence of the public prosecutor may be
dispensed with,
5) Consolidations
(a) Newly-filed Cases -- When newly-filed criminal
cases involving offenses based on the same facts or forming
part of a series of offenses of similar character, are
accompanied by a motion for consolidation filed by the Office
of the Prosecutor, the Executive Judge shall cause the raffle
to only one court which shall then resolve said motion for
consolidation, preferably on the date of the arraignment and
in the presence of the accused and counsel.
(b) Pending Cases with Multiple Accused -- In cases
involving multiple accused where a subsequent information
is filed involving an accused who has been subjected to
further investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor over an
incident which has the same subject matter as a prior
1077

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME IL

information/s against different accused, said subsequent
case when filed accompanied by a motion for consolidation
from the Office of the Prosecutor shall no longer be raffled
The subsequent case shall be assigned directly by the
Executive Judge to the court where the earlier case is
pending. If the earlier case is already at the trial stage and
witnesses have been presented, the parties may be
allowed to adopt the evidence so far presented, without
prejudice to additional direct examination questions and
cross examination questions.
6) Archiving o Cases
The archiving of cases shall be done within the period
prescribed under the Guidelines in the Archiving of Cases
under SC Administrative Circular No. 7-A-92, as restated in
OCA Circular No, 89-2004. A criminal case shall be
archived only if, after the issuance of the warrant of arrest,
the accused remains at large for six (6) months from the
delivery of the warrant to the proper peace officer. Such
case shall likewise be archived when proceedings therein
are ordered suspended for an indefinite period because:
(a) the accused appears to be suffering from an
unsound mental condition which effectively renders him
unable to fully understand the charge against him and to
plead intelligently, or to undergo trial, and he has to be
committed to a mental hospital;

(b) a valid prejudicial question in a civil action is
invoked during the pendency of the criminal case, unless
the civil and criminal cases are consolidated;
(c) an interlocutory order or incident in the criminal
case is elevated to, and is pending resolution/decision for
an Indefinite period before a higher court which has issued
a temporary restraining order or writ of preliminary
injunction; and

1078

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

(d) when the accused has jumped bail before
arraignment and cannot be arrested by the bondsman.
7) Revival of Provisionally Dismissed Cases.

Revival of provisionally dismissed cases shall
conform to the requisites and the periods provided for
under Sec. 8, Rule 117, Provisional dismissal of offenses
punishable by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) years or
a fine of any amount or both shall become permanent one
(1) year after issuance of the order without the case having
been revived. Provisional dismissal of offenses punishable
by imprisonment of more than six (6) years, shall become

permanent two (2) years after the issuance of the order
without the case having been revived.
8) Arraignment and Pre-trial

(a) Schedule of Arraignment and Pre-trial - Once the
court has acquired jurisdiction over the person of the
accused, the arraignment of the accused and the pre-trial
shall be set within ten (10) calendar days from date of the
court's receipt of the case for a detained accused, and
within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the court
acquires jurisdiction (either by arrest or voluntary surrender)
over a non-detained accused, unless a shorter period is
provided by special law or Supreme Court circular
The court must set the arraignment of the accused in
the commitment order, in the case of detained accused, or
in the order of approval of bail, in any other case. For this
purpose, where the Executive Judge and Pairing Judges
act on bail applications in cases assigned to other courts.
they shall coordinate with the courts to which the cases are
actually assigned for scheduling purposes.

(b) Notice of Arraignment and Pre-Trial -- Notice of
arraignment and pre-trial shall be sent to the accused,
hls/her counsel, private complainant or complaining law
enforcement agent, public prosecutor, and witnesses
1079

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

whose names appear in the information for purposes of
plea-bargaining, arraignment and pre-trial.
(c) Walver of Reading of the Information - In
multiple cases, the court, upon personal examination of the
accused, may allow a waver of the reading of the
information upon the full understanding and express
consent of the accused and his/her counsel, which consent
shall be expressly stated in both the minutes/certificate or
arraignment and the order of arraignment. The court shall

explain the waiver to the accused in the language or
dialect known to him/her, and ensure the accused's full
understanding of the consequences of the waiver before

approving the same
(d) Arraignment Proper

l. Plea Bargaining Except in Drug Cases -- If the
accused desires to enter a plea of guilty to a lesser
offense, plea bargaining shall Immediately proceed,
provided the private offended party in private crimes, or
the arresting officer in victimless crimes, is present to
give his/her consent with the conformity of the public
prosecutor to the plea bargaining. Thereafter, judgment
shall be immediately rendered in the same proceedings

ii. Plea of Guilty to the Crime Charged in the
Information -- If the accused pleads guilty to the crime
charged in the information, Judgment shall be
immediately rendered, except in those cases involving
capital punishment
iii. Where No Plea Bargaining or Plea of Guilty Takes
Place - If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty,
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense charged in
the information, the court shall immediately proceed with
the arraignment and the pre-trial.
The schedule of the trial dates, for both the
prosecution and the accused, shall be continuous and
1080

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous

Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M No, '5-06-10-SC)

within the periods provided in the Regular Rules/Special
Rules. The trial dates may be shortened depending on the
number of witnesses to be presented. In this regard, a
flowchart shall be prepared by the court which shall serve

as the final schedule of hearings.
Sample Flowcharts

A. Regular Rules
[
Arralgnmen1 a!'ld

30 days

Pre.Trial

)

Presentation of the
Prosecution's and the
Accused's Evidence
(6 months/180 daya)

Promulgation of
Decision (90 days from
submission of case for
decision)

B. Special Laws/Rules
1. Drug Cases

-Trial (To be finished
not 'ater than 60
days from fiting of
Information)

I'

?

Decision (15 days
from submission of
case for resolution)

2. Environmental Cases
Trial

Arraugment and
Pre-Trial

(3 months)
C

1081

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

-

-----""-.
/
J.brno
30 day
-__

Decision

7

(60 days from last day
to file memoranda)

Disposition period shall be within 10 months
from date of arraignment

3. Intellectual Property Rights Cases
and
I. Arraignment
Pre-Trial

"[
3o_days ?

•r,;,1

(60 days for each party
to present evidence or
120 days)

so.6.

j

Judgment

(90 day from
submission of case for
decision)

4, Arraignment and Pre-trial of Cases Referred to

Mediation
[

A.rt'lligrunf'nl and

�-,--,--,�\

Pre.'Trial

Med~ion

30 days

�
Judgment
d

--,I

(90 days from

submission of case for
decision)

1082

THal
(6 months/ 180
days)

l

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-SC)

Arraignment and Preliminary Conference of
Mediatable Cases subject to the Rule on Summary Procedure
(e)

The arraignment and preliminary conference shall be

simultaneously held, and the court shall take up all the
matters required under Sec. 14, Rule on Summary
Procedure during the preliminary conference.

i. If the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged in
the information, subheading II, item no. 8,
subparagraph () ii (Plea of Guilty to the Crime Charged
in the Information) shall be followed.

Ii. If the accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense,
subheading III, item no. 8 subparagraph (d) 1 (Plea
Bargaining except in Drug Cases) shall be followed.

lii. If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty,
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense charged in
the information, the court shall immediately proceed with
the arraignment and the preliminary conference, and
thereafter refer the case to mediation.
Sample flow chart
Rule on Summary Procedure of Criminal Cases referred
to Mediation
Arraignment and
Preliminary
Conference

30 day
Mediation
)

Trial

l

'

Judgment

(30 days from
termination of hearing)

1083

(60 days)

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
(f) Conduct of Pre-trial

i. Absence of parties The court shall proceed with
the pre-trial despite the absence of the accused and/or
private complainant, provided they were duly notified of
the same, and the counsel for the accused, as well as
the public prosecutor, are present.

li. Stipulations - Proposals for stipulations shall be
done with the active participation of the court itself and
shall not be left alone to the counsels.
iil. Marking of evidence The documentary evidence
of the prosecution and the accused shall be marked.
iv. Pre-tnal Order - The pre-trial Order shall
immediately be served upon the parties and counsel on
the same day after the termination of the pre-trial.
v. Compliance with the Rules -- Courts must strictly
comply with the Guidelines to be Observed in the
Conduct of Pre-trial under A.M. No. 03-1-09-SC.
9 Mediation
(a) The following cases shall be referred to mediation
on the civil liability unless a settlement is reached earlier in
the pre-trial/preliminary conference:

i. Crimes where payment may prevent criminal
prosecution or may extinguish criminal liability, such as
violations of:

a. 8.P. BIg. 22;
b. SSS Law (R.A. No. 1161 as amended by R.A.
No. 8282); and
c. PAG-4BIG Law (R.A. No, 9679)

ii, Crimes against property under Title 10 of the
Revised Penal Code (RPC), where the obligation may
1084

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trlal Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-08-10-SC)

be civil In nature, such as
'

a. Theft under Art. 308, RPC, cognizable by the
first level courts;
b. Estafa under Art. 315(1), RPC, except estafa
under Art. 315 (2) and (3)
c. Others forms of swindling under Art. 316, RPC;
d. Swindling of a minor under Art. 317, RPC;
e. Other deceits under Art. 318, RPC; and

f.

Malicious mischief under Art. 327, RPC.

iii. Crimes against honor under Title 13, RP, where
the liability may be civil in nature, such as:

a) Libel by means of writings or similar means
under Art. 355, RPC;
b) Threatening to publish and offer to present such
publication for a compensation under Art. 356, RPC;
c) Prohibited publication of acts referred to in the
course of official proceedings under Art. 357, RPC;
d) Grave Slander (Grave Oral Defamation) -- of
serious and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 1, RPC;
e) Simple Slander (Oral Defamation) - not of a
serious and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 2, RPC;
f) Grave Slander by Deed - of a serious nature
under Art. 359, par. 1 RPC;

g) Simple Slander by Deed nature Art. 359, par. 2, RPC

not of a serious

h) Incriminating innocent person under Art. 363, RPC;
i)

Intriguing against honor under Art. 364, RPC;
1085

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
iv. Libel under R.A. 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention
Act of 2012) where the liability may be civil in nature;

v. Criminal negligence under Title 14, RPC, where the

liability may be civil in nature; and
vi. Intellectual property rights cases where the liability
may be civil in nature.
(b) The referral of the case for mediation to the
Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit shall be made only

after the conduct of the arraignment and the pretrial/preliminary conference. The court shall serve the
Order of Referral to the PMC Unit immediately after the

arraignment and the pre-trial/preliminary conference.
The Mediation shall be terminated within a nonextendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date
of referral by the court to the PMC Unit. After the lapse of

the mediation period or if mediation fails, trial shall proceed.
Except those cases mentioned above, criminal cases
subject to the Rule on Summary Procedure shall not be
referred to mediation.
10. Bail
(a) Petition for bail
Petition for bail filed after the filing of the information
shall be set for summary hearing after arraignment and
pre-trial. Testimony of a witness in petition for bail may be
In the form allowed by subheading II, item no, 11, par. B
(Form of Testimony) of the Revised Guidelines, provided
that the demeanor of the witness is not essential in
determining his/her credibility.
Petition for bail shall be heard and resolved within a
non-extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from
date of the first hearing, except in drug cases which shall
be heard and resolved within twenty (20) calendar days,

1086

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No 15-06-10-$C)

without need of oral argument and submission of
memoranda, consistent with the summary nature of the
proceedings.
Motion for reconsideration on the resolution of petition

for bail shall be resolved within a non-extendible period of ten
(10) calendar days from date of submission of the motion.
Sample Flowcharts with Petition for Bail
A. Regular Rules

r Al-ra.!1tnmant
arid
Pre-Trial
1

f!ca.·rni 1u1! Ra�olutmn
of Petition for Bail (30

days)

Presentation of
Evidence-in-chief of the
Prosecution (60 days)
nd Presentation of

Promulgation of

I/

Evidence of the
Accused (90 days)

Decision (90 days
from submission of
case for decision)

"-

>

Ptuentation or Evide.nce iu the Petition for Bait a�
Preaentation uf Eviden011-i11-chi11f of tl10 Prl)80Cut\o!'1
and of Evidence f tho Accused (160 days)

B. Drug Cases

I

Arraignment. and

Pree-Trial (Wiehin
10 days from fling
cf information)

!'

,I

1087

-- --,
Hearing and Resolutor
of Petition for Beul (20
days) and Presentation of
Evidence-in-chief et the
Prosecution

-

j

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

q

from7

Pesontation of
Evidence of the

Decision (15 days
submission of case for

Accused (265 days)

resolution

'1'1·111 l ('T'u he fini,hed nor; lot!'r than 60 day!
filing of information

-

�'>

�_,,,,
•

(b) Evidence in petition for bail

The resolution of petition for bail shall be based solely
on the evidence presented during the bail proceedings by
the prosecution. The prosecution shall present only pieces

of evidence that are essential in establishing that the
evidence of guilt Is strong. The accused need not present
evidence to contradict or rebut the prosecution's evidence.
(c)

Non-suspension of the presentation of evidence

The court shall not suspend the presentation of the
evidence in chief while awaiting resolution of the petition
for bail or the motion for reconsideration.
11, Form of Testimony

(a) For First Level Courts
In all criminal cases, including those covered by the
Rule on Summary Procedure, the testimonies of witnesses
shall consist of the duly subscribed written statements
given to law enforcement or peace officers or the affidavits
or counter-affidavits submitted before the Investigating
prosecutor, and if such are not available, testimonies shall
be in the form of judicial affidavits, subject to additional
direct and cross-examination questions.

1088

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-3C)

The trial prosecutor may dispense with the sworn
written statements submitted to the law enforcement or
peace officers and prepare the judicial affidavits of the
afflants or modify or revise the said sworn statements
before presenting it as evidence.
(b) For Second Level Courts, Sandiganbayan and
Court of Tax Appeals
In criminal cases where the demeanor of the witness

is not essential in determining the credibility of said
witness, such as forensic chemists, medico-legal officers,

investigators, auditors, accountants, engineers, custodians,
expert witnesses and other similar witnesses, who will
testify on the authenticity, ue execution and the contents
of public documents and reports, and in criminal cases that
are transactional in character, such as falsification,
malversation, estafa, or other crimes where the culpability
or innocence of the accused can be established through
documents, the testimonies of the witnesses shall be the
duly subscribed written statements given to law
enforcement or peace officers or the affidavits or counteraffidavits submitted before the investigating prosecutor,
and If such are not available, testimonies shall be in the
form of judicial affidavits, subject to additional direct and
cross-examination questions.
In all other cases where the culpability or the
innocence of the accused is based on the testimonies of
the alleged eyewitnesses, the testimonies of these
witnesses shall be in oral form.

12. Stipulations
During pre-trial/preliminary conference, the court shall
require the parties to enter into stipulations on the subject
of both direct and cross-examinations of witnesses who
have no personal knowledge of the material facts
constituting the crimes, such as forensic chemists, medico1089

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
auditors, accountants,
legal officers,
investigators,
engineers, custodians, expert witnesses and other similar

witnesses, who will testify on the authenticity, due
execution and the contents of public documents and
reports; corroborative witnesses; and those who will testify
on the civil liability.

This rule is without prejudice to allowing additional
direct and cross-examination questions.
If stipulations cannot be had in full, where the adverse
party does not waive the right to cross-examination, the
subject of the direct testimony of these witnesses should
be stipulated upon, without prejudice to additional direct

and cross-examination questions.
13. Trial

(a) The court shall encourage the accused and the

prosecution to avail of:
i. For the accused - Secs. 12 and 13, Rule 119 cn the
application for examination of witness for accused
before trial and how it is made; and
ii. For the prosecution - Sec. 15, Rule 119 on the
conditional examination of witness for the prosecution.

(b) Absence of counsel de parte -- In the absence of

counsel de parte, the hearing shall proceed
appointment by the court of a counsel de officio.

upon

(c) Offer of evidence - The offer of evidence, the
comment/objection thereto, and the court ruling shall be
made orally.A party is required to make his/her oral offer
of evidence on the same day after the presentation of
his/her last witness, and the opposing party is required to
immediately interpose his/her oral comment/objection
thereto. Thereafter, the court shall make a ruling on the
offer of evidence in open court.

1090

Appendix C

Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No. 15-06-10-$C)

In making the offer, the counsel shall cite the specific
page numbers of the court record where the exhibits being
offered are found, if attached thereto, The court shall
ensure that all exhibits offered are submitted to it on the
same day of the offer.

If the exhibits are not attached to the record, the party
making the offer must submit the same during the offer of
evidence in open court.
(d)
Demurrer to Evidence - After the
prosecution has rested its case, the court shall inquire from
the accused if he/she desires to move for leave of court to
file a demurrer to evidence, or to proceed with the

presentation of his/her evidence,
If the accused orally moves for leave of court to file a
demurrer to evidence, the court shall orally resolve the
same, If the motion for leave is denied, the court shall
issue an order for the accused to present and terminate
his/her evidence on the dates previously scheduled and
agreed upon, and to orally offer and rest his/her case on
the day his/her last witness is presented,
If despite the denial of the motion for leave, the
accused insists on filing the demurrer to evidence, the
previously scheduled dates for the accused to present
evidence shall be cancelled.
The demurrer to evidence shall be fled within a nonextendible period of ten (10) calendar days from the date
leave of court is granted, and the corresponding comment
shall be filed within a nor-extendible period of ten (10)
calendar days counted from date of receipt of the demurrer
to evidence, The demurrer shall be resolved by the court
within a non-extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days
from date of the filing of the comment or lapse of the ten
(10)-day period to file the same.

1091

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME Ii

If the motion for leave of court to file demurrer to
evidence is granted, and the subsequent demurrer to
evidence is denied, the accused shall likewise present and

terminate his/her evidence (one day apart, morning and
afternoon) and shall orally offer and rest his/her case on
the day his/her last witness is presented. The court shall
rule on the oral offer of evidence of accused and the
comment or objection of the prosecution on the same day
of the offer, If the court denies the motion to present
rebuttal evidence because it is no longer necessary, it shall
consider the case submitted for decision.

(e)

Presentation

of

Rebuttal

and

Sur-rebuttal

Evidence.

- If the court grants the motion to present rebuttal
evidence, the prosecution shall immediately proceed with
its presentation after the accused had rested his/her case,
and orally rest its case in rebuttal after the presentation of
its last rebuttal witness, Thereafter, the accused shall
immediately present sur-rebuttal evidence, if there is any,
and orally rest the case in sur-rebuttal after the
presentation of its last sur-rebuttal witness. Thereafter, the
court shall submit the case for decision
(f) One-day examination of witness rule - The court
shall strictly adhere to the rule that a witness has to be fully
examined in one (1) day

14. Memoranda
The submission of memoranda is discretionary on the
part of the court, which in no case shall exceed twenty-five

(25) pages in length, single-spaced, on legal size paper,
using size 14 font. The period to submit memoranda shall
be non-extendible and shall not suspend the running of the
period of promulgation of the decision; thus, with or without
memoranda, the promulgation shall push through
as scheduled.
1092

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No 15-06-10-SC)

15. Lack of Stenographic Notes
Judges who conducted the trial and heard the
testimonies of some or all of the witnesses shall not defer
the submission of the case for decision on the ground of
incomplete or missing transcript of stenographic notes. If
the case was heard completely by another judge, not the
Judge tasked to write the decision, the latter shall direct the
stenographers concerned to submit the complete
transcripts within a period of thirty (30) calendar days from
date of his/her assumption to office.

16. Promulgation
(a) Schedule of promulgation - The court shall
announce in open court and include in the order submitting

the case for decision, the date of the promulgation of its
decision which shall not be more than ninety (90) calendar
days from the date the case is submitted for decision,"
except when the case is covered by Special Rules and
other laws which provide for a shorter period,
(b) Resolution of motion for reconsideration of
judgment of conviction or motion for new trial -- A motion
for reconsideration of judgment of conviction or motion for
new trial under Rule 121 filed within the reglementary
period of fifteen (15) days from promulgation shall be
resolved within a non-extendible period of ten (10)
calendar days from the submission of the comment of the
prosecution. With or without comment, the court shall
resolve the motion within the ten (10)-day period.

For those covered by Regular Pules, including Bandiganbayan and Court

of Tax Appeals.

'Foe those covered by Special Laws and Rules: (a) Drug cases - 15 days
frorr the date of submission for resolution of the case; (b) Environmental casos 60 days trom the last day of the 30-day period to file memoranda; (c) Intellectual
Property Rights cases - 6 days from the time the case is submit;ed for decision,
with or without the memorarda; and (d) Others that may be provided in other
Rules and Laws.

1093

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

17. Inventory of Criminal Cases

The one (1) week of each semester devoted for the
conduct of annual and seml-annual physical inventory of
cases and preparation of the semestral docket inventory
report pursuant to Administrative Circular No. 76-2007
shail not suspend court hearings.
18. Posting

The Revised Guidelines shall be posted at all floors of
the covered halls of justice, the Sandiganbayan, the Court
of Tax Appeals and the offices of their respective Clerks of
Court, including all offices of the Integrated Bar of the
Philippines and other Bar associations.
IV, Monitoring, Evaluation and Training
The application of and adherence to the Revised
Guidelines shall be subject to periodic monitoring by the
Committee and its Technical staff by visitation and
submission of data.
For this purpose, all courts covered by the Revised
Guidelines shall accomplish and submit a periodic report of
data in a form to be generated and distributed by the
Committee.
Training of judges and court personnel shall be
undertaken by the PHILJA in coordination with the
Committee and its Technical staff.

V. Effoct of Non-Compliance
Non-compliance with the Revised Guidelines,
including failure to observe the timelines and deadlines
herein provided, is a ground for disciplinary action.

1094

Appendix C
Revised Guidelines For Continuous
Trial Of Criminal Cases
(A.M. No, 15-06-10-$C)

VI. Repealing Clause
Existing rules and guidelines inconsistent with the
Revised Guidelines are deemed amended or repealed.

VII. Effectivity
The Revised Guidelines shall take effect on 1
September 2017, after publication for two (2) consecutive
weeks in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

1095

APPENDIX D
RULE ON CYBERCRIME WARRANTS°
Section 1. PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
Section 1.1. Title. This Rule shall be known and
cited as the "Rule on Cybercrime Warrants."
Section 1.2. Scope and Applicability. -- This Rule sets

forth the procedure for the application and grant of warrants
and related orders involving the preservation, disclosure,
interception, search, seizure, and/or examination, as well as
the custody, and destruction of computer data, as provided
under Republic Act No, (RA) 10175, otherwise known as the

"Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012."

Section 1.3. Supplementary Nature of this Rule to
the Existing Rules of Procedure and Remedies. -This
Rule supplements the existing Rules of Criminal Procedure,
which provisions shall continue to govern the preliminary
investigation and all stages of prosecution of criminal actions
involving violations of RA 10175, Including all crimes defined
and penalized by the Revised Penal Code, as amended, and
special laws, committed by, through, and with the use of
information and communications technologies.
Remedies provided under existing procedural rules
shall, whenever applicable, be made available to any party
who seeks relief against any of the orders provided under
this Rule.°

[Ncte omitted]

Sections 10t0 21, except Sections 12 ard 18

Such remedies as. but not limited to, a motion to quash any of the
warrants provided under this Rufe

1096

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 1.4. Definition of Terms. - For purposes of
this Rule:
a) Communication -- refers to the transmission of
information through information and communications
technology (ICT) media, including voice, video, and other
forms of data;'

b) Computer - refers to an electronic, magnetic,
optical, electrochemical, or other data processing or
communications device, or grouping of such devices,
capable of performing logical arithmetic, routing, or storage
functions and which includes any storage facility or
equipment or communications facility or equipment directly
related to or operating m conjunction with such device;

c) Computer data -- refers to any representation of facts,
information, or concepts in a form suitable for processing in a
computer system, including a program suitable to cause a

computer system to perform a function, and includes electronic
documents and/or electronic data messages whether stored in
local computer systems or online;"
d) Computer system -- refers to any device or group
of interconnected or related devices, one or more of which,
pursuant to a program, performs automated processing of
data;"

R.A. 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(c); IRR. Rule 1, Section 3(g)
t covers any type of computer device including devices with data
processing capabilities ike mobile phones. smart phones, computer networks,
and other devices connected to the internet. RA 10175, Chapter 1 Section 3()
IRR, Fule 1, Section 3()
RA 10175, Chacter 1. Section 3(e); IRR, Rule t, Section 3()
"t covers any type of device ith data processing capabilities including,
but not limited to, computers and mobile pt ones. The device consisting of
hardware and software may include input. output, and storage components whict
may stand atone or be connected to a network or other similar devices It also
incl.des computer storage devices or media; RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(g);
IR, rule 1, Section 3()

1097

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
e)

Content

data -- refers to the

content of the

communication. the meaning or purported meaning of the

communication, or the message or information being
conveyed by the communication, other than traffic data;'
f) Cybercrime court - refers to any of the Regional
Trial Courts which are designated as special cybercrime

courts:
'

g) Forensic image -- also known as a forensic copy,
refers to an exact bit-by-bit copy of a data carrier, including

slack, unallocated space, and unused space;
refers to the application of
h) Forensics
investigative and analytical techniques that conform to
evidentiary standards for use in court;"

i) Hash value - refers to the mathematical algorithm
produced against digital information (a file, a physical disk
or a logical disk) thereby creating a "digital fingerprint" or

"digital DNA" for that information;'
j) Information and Communications Technology
(ICT) - refers to the totality of electronic means to access,
create, collect, store, process, receive, transmit, present
and disseminate information;"
k) Interception -- refers to listening to, recording,
or
surveillance
of
the
content
of
monitoring
communications, including procuring of the content data,
either directly, through access and use of a computer
gR, Rule 1, Section 3(m)
AM. No. 03-03-03-SC, 15 November 2016; RA 10175, Chapter
5, Section 21, 2 par.

'[Note omitted]
"[Note omitec]
'A hash value is a one-way algorithm that makes it impossible to
alter digital evidence without causing change in the corresponding
values; IRR, Rule 1, Section 30)
"RA 10844, Section 3(a)

1098

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants
system, or indirectly through the use of electronic
eavesdropping or tapping devices, at the same time that
the communication is occurring;"
I) ltem is a general term used to refer to objects of
the warrant application and/or the warrant itself, such as
the subject computer data, the related computer device/s,
and/or other parts of the computer system;
m) Offense -- is a general term used to refer to either
a violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses), Section 5
(Other Offenses), or Section 6 (all crimes defined and
penalized by the Revised Penal Code, as amended, and
other special laws, if committed by, through, and with the
use of 1CT), Chapter II of RA 10175;
n) Off-site search - refers to the process whereby
law enforcement authorities, by virtue of a warrant to
search, seize, and examine, are allowed to bring the
computer device/s and/or parts of the computer system
outside the place to be searched in order to conduct the
forensic examination of the computer data subject of the
warrant;"
o) On-site search - refers to the process whereby
law enforcement authorities, by virtue of a warrant to
search, seize, and examine, obtains the computer data
subject thereof for forensic examination, without the need
of bringing the related computer device/sand/or parts of
the computer system outside the place to be searched;"

p) Preservation -- refers to the keeping of data that
already exists in a stored form, protected from anything
that would cause its current quality or condition to change
or deteriorate"

RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(m); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(aa)

"Note omitted]
"jNote omitted]
jvote omited]

1099

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

q) Service provider - refers to; (a) any public or
private entity that provides users of its service the ability to
communicate by means of a computer system; and (b) any
other entity that processes or stores computer data on
behalf of such communication service or users of such

service;
The term service provider as used in this Rule is
understood to include any service provider offering ts
services within the territory af the Philippines, regardless of
its principal place of business;

r) Subscriber's information - refers to any
information contained in the form of computer data or any
other form that Is held by a service provider, relating to
subscribers of its services, other than traffic or content
data, and by which any of the following can be established:
1. The type of communication service used, the
technical provisions taken therewith, and the period of
service;
2. The subscriber's identity, postal or geographic
address, telephone and other access number, any
assigned network address, billing and payment
information that are available on the basis of the service
agreement or arrangement; or
3. Any other available information on the site of the
installation of communication equipment tnat is available on
the basis of the service agreement or arrangement and
s) Traffic data - refers to any computer data other
than the content of the communication, including, but not

gA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(n), IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(19
convention on Cybercrime (ETS No. 185); Chapter 11, Section
2, Article 18(1)(b)
g 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(0); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(gg)

1100

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants
limited to, the communication's origin, destination, route,
time, date, size, duration, or type of underlying service.
Section 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 2.1. Venue of Criminal Actions. -- The
criminal actions for violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime
offenses) and/or Section 5 (Other offenses), Chapter II of
RA 10175, shall be filed before the designated cybercrime
court of the province or city where the offense or any of its
elements is committed," or where any part of the computer
system used is situated, or where any of the damage
caused to a natural or juridical person took place: Provided,
that the court where the criminal action is first filed shall
acquire jurisdiction to the exclusion of the other courts.°
All other crimes defined and penalized by the Revised
Penal Code, as amended, and other special laws,
committed by, through, and with the use of ICT, as
provided under Section 6, Chapter ll of RA 10175, shall be
filed before the regular or other specialized regional trial
counts, as the case may be.
Section 2.2. Where to fife an Application for a
Warrant. - An application for a warrant under this Rule
concerning a violation of Section 4 (Cybercrime Offenses)
and/or Section 5 (Other Offenses), Chapter II of RA 10175
shall be filed by the law enforcement authorities before any
of the designated cybercrime courts of the province or the
city where the offense or any of its elements has been
committed, is being committed, or is about to be
committed, or where any part of the computer system used
is situated, or where any of the damage caused to a
"RA 10175, Chapter 1, Section 3(p); IRR, Rule 1, Section 3(h)

Note omitted]

"RA 10175,IRR, Rule 4, Section 22
• No 99-11-07-SC [1 February 200O] designates certain branches of

the RTCs as Family Courts; Supreme Court Administrative Order No.23-08 23
January 2008] designates special courts to hear, try, and degide ervironmentat

casS

1101

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON

REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

natural or juridical person took place. However, the
cybercrime courts in Quezon City, the City of Manila,
Makati City, Pasig City, Cebu City, Iollo City, Davao City
and Cagayan De Oro City shall have the special authority
to act on applications and issue warrants which shall be
enforceable nationwide and outside the Philippines.

On the other hand, an application for a warrant under
this Rule for violation of Section 6, Chapter II of RA 10175
(all crimes defined and penalized by the Revised Penal
Code, as amended, and other special laws, if committed
by, through, and with the use of \CT) shall be filed by the
law enforcement authorities with the regular or other
specialized regional trial courts, as the case may be, within
its territorial jurisdiction in the places above-described."

Section 2.3. Incidents Related to the Warrant
When a Criminal Action is Instituted. -- Once a criminal
action is instituted, a motion to quash and other incidents
that relate to the warrant shall be heard and resolved by
the court that subsequently acquired jurisdiction over the
criminal action."The prosecution has the duty to move for
the transmittal of the records, as well as the transfer of the
items' custody to the latter court, which procedure is set
forth in Section 7.2 of this Rule.

Section 2.4. Examination of Applicant and Record.
- Before issuing a warrant, the Judge must personally
examine in the form of searching questions and answers,
in writing and under oath, the applicant and the witnesses
he may produce, on facts personally known to them and
attach to the record their sworn statements, together with
the judicial affidavits submitted.
"reanding the list of SCCCs with authority to issue warrants enforceable
natiorwide under A.M. No. 03-03-03-SC [15 November 2016]
places above-described" refer to the provinoe or the city whore the
offense or any of lts elerents nas been committed, is being committed, or ls about
to be committed, or where any part of the computer system used is situated, or
where any of the damage caused to a natural or juridical person took place.
jataloan •Court of Appeals, G.R 104879, 6 May 1994

rte

1102

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 2.5. Effective Period of Warrants. -- Any
warrant issued under this Rule shall only be effective for
the length of time as determined by the court, which shall
not exceed a period of ten (10) days from its issuance. The
court issuing the warrant may, upon motion, extend its
effectivity based only on justifiable reasons for a period
not exceeding ten (10) days from the expiration of the
original period.
Section 2.6. Contempt. - Failure to timely file the
returns for any of the issued warrants under this Rule or to
duly turn-over to the court's custody any of the items
disclosed, intercepted, searched, seized, and/or examined
as prescribed hereunder, shall subject the responsible law
enforcement authorities to an action for contempt, which
procedures shall be governed by Rule 71 of the Rules of
Civil Procedure, insofar as they are applicable.
Section 2.7, Obstruction of Justice for NonCompliance; Where to File. -Pursuant to Section 20,
Chapter IV of RA 10175, failure to comply with the
provisions of Chapter IV, specifically the orders from law
enforcement authorities, shall be punished as a violation of
Presidential Decree No. 1829, entitled "Penalizing
Obstruction Of Apprehension And Prosecution Of Criminal
Offenders.""
The criminal charge for obstruction of justice shall be
filed before the designated cybercrime court that has
jurisdiction over the place where the non-compliance was
committed.
Section 2.8. Extraterritorial Service of Warrants
and Other Court Processes. - For persons or service
providers situated outside of the Philippines, service of
warrants and/or other court processes shall be coursed
through the Department of Justice - Office of Cybercrime,
(Note omitted]

1103

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II

in line with all relevant international instruments and/or

agreements on the matter.
Section 3. PRESERVATION OF COMPUTER DATA

-

Section 3.1. Preservation of Computer Data.
Pursuant to Section 13, Chapter IV of R A 10175, the
integrity of traffic data and subscriber's information shall be
kept, retained, and preserved by a service provider for a
minimum period of six (6) months from the date of the
transaction. On the other hand, content data shall be
preserved for six (6) months from the date of receipt of the
order from law enforcement authorities requiring its

preservation.
Law enforcement authorities may order a one-time
extension for another six (6) months: that once computer
data that is preserved, transmitted or stored by a service
provider is used as evidence in a case, the receipt by the
service provider of a copy of the transmittal document to the
Office of the Prosecutor shall be deemed a notification to
preserve the computer data until the final termination of the
case and/or as ordered by the court, as the case maybe.
The service provider ordered to preserve computer
data shall keep the order and its compliance therewith
confidential.

Section 4. DISCLOSURE OF COMPUTER DATA

Section 4.1. Disclosure of Computer Data.
Pursuant to Section 14, Chapter IV of RA 10175, law
enforcement authorities, upon securing a Warrant to
Disclose Computer Data (WDCD) under this Rule, shall
issue an order requiring any person or service provider to
pg4 10175, Chapter 6, Section 22, and Chapter 7, Sect.on 23
RA 10175, Chapter 4, Sect/on 13.
R4 10175, Chapter 4, Section 14

1104

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

disclose or submit subscriber's information, traffic data or
relevant data in his/her or its possession or control within
seventy-two (72) hours from receipt of the order in relation
to a valid complaint officially docketed and assigned for
investigation and the disclosure ls necessary and relevant
for the purpose of investigation.
Section 4.2. Warrant to Disclose Computer Data
(wDCD) - A WDCD is an order In writing Issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge,
upon application of law enforcement authorities,
authorizing the latter to Issue an order to disclose end
accordingly, require any person or service provider to
disclose or submit subscriber's information, traffic data, or
relevant data in his/her or its possession or control.

Section 4.3. Contents of Application for a WDCD.The verified application for a WDCD, as well as the
supporting affidavits, shall state the following essential facts:
1)

The probable offense involved;

2)

Relevance and necessity of the computer data or
subscriber's information sought to be disclosed for the
purpose of the investigation;
3) Names of the individuals or entities whose
computer data or subscriber's information are sought to
be disclosed, including the names of the individuals or
entities who have control, possession or access thereto.
if available;
4) Particular description of the computer data or
subscriber's information sought to be disclosed;
5)
Place where the disclosure of computer data or
subscriber's information is to be enforced, if available;

"[Note omitted]

1105

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I
6) Manner or method by which the disclosure of the
computer data or subscriber's information is to be
carried out, If available; and

7)

Other relevant information that will persuade the

court that there is a probable cause to issue a WDCD.

Section 4.4. Issuance and Form of WDCD. -- If the
judge is satisfied that there ls probable cause to believe
that the facts upon which the application for WDCD exists,
he/she shall issue the WDCD, which must be substantially
in the form prescribed in "Annex A" of this Rule.

Section 4.5. Return on the WDCD; Retained Copy.
-- Within forty-eight (48) hours from implementation or after
the expiration of the effectivity of the WDCD, whichever
comes first, the authorized law enforcement officer shall
submit a return on the WDCD to the court that issued it
and simultaneously turn over the custody of the disclosed
computer data or subscriber's Information thereto as
provided under Section 7.1 of this Rule.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
return has been made, and if none, to summon the law
enforcement officer to whom the WDCD was issued and
require him to explain why no return was made, without
prejudice to any action for contempt as provided under
Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Law enforcement authorities are allowed to retain a
copy of the disclosed computer data or subscriber's
information subject of the wDCD which may be utilized for
case build-up or preliminary investigation purposes,
without the need of any court intervention; that the details
thereof are kept strictly confidential and that the retained
copy shall be labelled as such

[Note omitted]

1106

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants
The retained copy shall be turned over upon the filing
of a criminal action involving the disclosed computer data
or subscriber's information to the court where such action
has been instituted, or if no criminal action has been filed,

upon order of the issuing court under the procedure set
forth in paragraph 3 of Section 8.2 of this Rule.
Upon its turn-over, the retained copy shall always be

ept, destroyed, and/or returned together with the
computer data or subscriber's information that was
originally turned over to the issuing court under the first
paragraph of this Section.

Section 4.6. Contempt. - Non-compliance with the
order to disclose issued by law enforcement authorities
shall be deemed non-compliance with the WDCD on which
the said order is based, and shall likewise give rise to an
action for contempt under Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Section 5, INTERCEPTION OF COMPUTER DATA

Section 5.1, Interception of Computer Data. -Interception, as defined under Section 3 (m), Chapter I of
RA 10175, may be carried out only by virtue of a court
issued warrant, duly applied for by law enforcement
authorities.

Section 5.2. Warrant to Intercept Computer Data
(WICD). -- A WICD is an order in writing issued in the
name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge,
upon application of law enforcement authorities,
authorizing the latter to carry out any or all of the following
activities: (a) listening to, (b) recording, (c) monitoring, or
(d) surveillance of the content of communications,
including procuring of the content of computer data, either
directly, through access and use of a computer system or
RA 10175, Chapter 4. Section 15

1107

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
indirectly, through the use of electronic eavesdropping or

tapping devices, at the same time that the communication
ls occurring.

Section 5.3. Contents of Application for WICD.

-

The verified application for a WICD, as weli as the

supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts similar

to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the subject
matter is the communication or computer data sought to be
intercepted.
Section 5.4.Issuance and Form of WICD. -- If the
judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to believe
that the facts upon which the application for WICD exists,

he shall issue the WICD, which must be substantially in the
form prescribed in "Annex B" of this Rule.
Section 5.5. Return on the WICD. -- Within fortyeight (48) hours from implementation or after the expiration
of the effectivity of the WICD, whichever comes first, the
authorized law enforcement officers shall submit a return
on the WICD to the court that issued it and simultaneously
turn-over the custody of the intercepted communication or
computer data thereto as provided under Section 7,1 of

this Rule.
It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
return has been made, and if none, to summon the law
enforcement officer to whom the WICD was issued and
require him to explain why no return was made, without
prejudice to any action for contempt as provided under
Section 2.6 of this Rule.

Section 5.6. Notice after filing of Return. - Within
if no return is
thirty (30) days from the filing of the return,
filed, from the lapse of the forty-eight (48) hour period to file
the return, the authorized 'aw enforcement officer has the
duty to notify the person whose communications or computer
data have been intercepted of the activities conducted

or,

1108

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

pursuant to the WICD. If a return has been filed, a copy of the
same shall be attached to the notice. On the other hand, If no
return has been file, the notice shall state the details of the
interception activities, including the contents of the
intercepted communication or computer data.
Within ten (10) days from notice, the person whose
communications or computer data have been intercepted
may challenge, by motion, the legality of the interception
before the Issuing court.
Section 6. SEARCH, SEIZURE AND
EXAMINATION OF COMPUTER DATA"

Section 6.1. Warrant to Search, Seize and
Examine Computer Data (WSSECD). - A Warrant to
Search, Seize and Examine Computer Data (WSSECD) is
an order in writing issued in the name of the People of the
Philippines, signed by a judge, upon application of law
enforcement authorities, authorizing the latter to search the
particular place for items to be seized and/or examined.
Section

6.2.

Contents of Application for a
WSSECD. - The verified application for a WSSECD, as well
as the supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts
similar to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the
subject matter is the computer data sought to be searched,
seized, and examined, and all other items related thereto. In
addition, the application shall contain an explanation of the
search and seizure strategy to be implemented, including a
projection of whether or not an off-site or on-site search will
be conducted, taking into account the nature of the
computer data involved, the computer or computer system's
security features, and/or other relevant circumstances, if
such information is available.

p4 10175, Chapter 4, Section 15

1109

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME ii

Section 6.3. Issuance and Form of WSSECD. - If
the judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to
believe that the facts upon which the application for
WSSECD exists, he shall issue the WSSECD, which must
be substantially in the form prescribed under "Annex C" of
this Rule.
Section 6.4. Off-site and On-site Principle; Return
of Items Seized Off-site. -- Law enforcement authorities
shall, if the circumstances so allow, endeavor to first make
a forensic image of the computer data on-site as well as
limit their search to the place specified in the warrant.
Otherwise, an off-site search may be conducted, provided
that a forensic image is, nevertheless, made, and that the
reasons for the said search are stated in the initial return.
A person whose computer devices or computer
system have been searched and seized off-site may, upon
motion, seek the return of the said items from the court
issuing the WSSECD: Provided, that a forensic image of
the computer data subject of the WSSECD has already
been made. The court may grant the motion upon its
determination that no lawful ground exists to otherwise
withhold the return of such items to him.

Section 6.5. Allowable Activities During the
Implementation of the WSSECD. - Pursuant to Section
15, Chapter IV of RA 10175, the interception of
communications and computer data may be conducted
during the implementation of the WSSECD: Provided, that
the interception activities shall only be limited to
communications and computer data that are reasonably
related to the subject matter of the WSSECD; and that the
said activities are fully disclosed, and the foregoing relation
duly explained in the initial return.

1110

Appendix D

Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants
Likewise, law enforcement authorities may order any
person, who has knowledge about the functioning of the
computer system and the measures to protect and
preserve the computer data therein, to provide, as is
reasonable, the necessary information to enable the
undertaking of the search, seizure and examination.
Sectlon 6.6. Initial Return. -- Within ten (10) days
from the issuance of the WSSECD, the authorized law

enforcement officers shall submit an initial return that
contains the following information;
1) A list of all the items that were seized, with a
detailed identification of: (a) the devices of the computer
system seized, Including the name, make, brand, serial
numbers, or any other mode of identification, if available;
and (b) the hash value of the computer data and/or the
seized computer device or computer system containing
such data;
2) A statement on whether a forensic image of the
computer data was made on-site, and if not, the reasons
for making the forensic image off-site;
3) A statement on whether the search was
conducted on-site, and if not, the reasons for conducting
the search and seizure off-site;
4) A statement on whether interception was
conducted during the implementation of the WSSECD,
together with (a) a detailed identification of all the interception
activitles that were conducted; (b) the hash value/s of the
communications or computer data intercepted; and (c) an
explanation of the said items' reasonable relation to the
computer data subject of the WSSECD;

5) List of all the actions taken to enforce the
WSSECD, from the time the law enforcement officers
g4 10175, Chapter 4, Section 15.

111f

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

reached the place to be seized until they left the premises

with the seized Items and reached the place where the
Items seized were stored and secured for examination, and

6)

A reasonable estimation

of how long the

examination of the items seized will be concluded and the
justification therefor.

It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
Initial return has been made, and if none, to summon the
law enforcement authority to whom the WSSECD was
issued and require him to explain why no initial return was
made, without prejudice to any action for contempt as
provided under Section 2.6 of this Rule.
Section 6.7. Period to Examine and Order to Return.
- After the initial return is submitted to the court pursuant to
the WSSECD, the court shall issue an order fixing the period
to conclude the examination of all the items seized, which
period may be extended not exceeding thirty (30) days, upon
motion, for justifiable reasons.
Section 6.8. Final Return on the WSSECD. - Within
forty-eight (48) hours after the expiration of the period to
examine as provided under Section 6.7 of this Rule, the
authorized law enforcement officers shall submit a final return
on the WSSECD to the court that issued it, and simultaneously
turn-over the custody of the seized computer data, as well as
all other items seized and/or the communications or computer
data intercepted in relation thereto, following the procedure
under Section 7.1 of this Rule.

It is the duty of the issuing judge to ascertain if the
final return has been made, and if none, to summon the
law enforcement officer to whom the WSSECO was Issued
and require him to explain why no final return was made,
without prejudice to any action for contempt as provided
under Section 2.6 of this Rule.
112

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 6.9. Examination where lawful possession
of device is obtained; Warrant to Examine Computer
Data (WECD). - Upon acquiring possession of a computer
device or computer system via a lawful warrantless arrest. or
by any other lawful method," law enforcement authorities
shall first apply for a warrant before searching the said
computer device or computer system for the purpose of
obtaining for forensic examination the computer data
contained therein. The warrant therefor shall be denominated
as a Warrant to Examine Computer Data (WECD).
The verified application for a WECD, as well as the
supporting affidavits, shall state the essential facts similar
to those in Section 4.3 of this Rule, except that the subject
matter is the computer data sought to be examined. In
addition, the application shall disclose the circumstances
surrounding the lawful acquisition of the computer device
or computer system containing the said computer data.
If the judge is satisfied that there is probable cause to
believe that the facts upon which the application for WECD
exists, he shall lssue the WECD, which must be substantially
in the form prescribed under "Annex D" of this Rule.
The initial and final returns, as well as the period to
examine under a WECD, shall be similarly governed by the
procedures set forth in Sections 6.6 to 6.8 of this Rule.
Interception of communications and computer data

may be likewise conducted during the implementation of
the WECD under the same conditions stated in Section 6.5
of this Rule.

y«lief warranties.s seizure_ en flagrate delicto, or by voluntary surrender

of the unit.

1113

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
Section 7. CUSTODY OF COMPUTER DATA

Section 7.1. Deposit and Custody of Seized
Computer Data.- Upon the filing of the return for a WDCD
or WICD, or the final return for a WSSECD Or WECD, all
computer data subject thereof shall be simultaneously
deposited in a sealed package with the same court that
issued the warrant. It shall be accompanied by a complete
and verified inventory of all the other items seized in relation

thereto, and by the affidavit of the duly authorized law
enforcement officer containing:

1) The date and time of the disclosure, interception,
search, seizure, and/or examination of the computer data,
as the case may be. If the examiner or analyst has
recorded his/her examination, the recording shall also be
deposited with the court in a sealed package and stated in
the affidavit;

2) The particulars of the subject computer data,
including its hash value;
3) The manner by which the computer data was
obtained;
4) Detailed identification of all items seized in relation
to the subject computer data, including the computer
device containing such data and/or other parts of the
computer system seized, indicating the name, make,
brand, serial numbers, or any other mode of identification,
if available,
5) The names and positions of the law enforcement
authorities who had access to the computer data from the
time of its seizure until the termination of the examination but

gA 10176, Chapter 4, Section 16

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants
prior to depositing it with the court, and the names of
officers who wilt be delivering the seized items to the court
6) The name of the law enforcement officer who may
be allowed access to the deposited data, When the said
officer dies, resigns of severs tie with the office, his/her
successor may, upon motion, be granted access to the
deposit; and

7) A certification that no duplicates or copies of the
whole or any part thereof have been made, or if made, all
such duplicates or copies are included in the sealed
package deposited, except for the copy retained by law
enforcement authorities pursuant to paragraph 3 of Section

4.5 of this Rule.
The return on the warrant shall be filed and kept by
the custodian of the logbook on search warrants who shall
enter therein the date of the return, the description of the
sealed package deposited, the name of the affiant, and
other actions of the judge.
Section 7.2. Duty of the Prosecutor When Criminal
Action is Instituted. -- Once a criminal action is instituted,
it shall be the duty of the prosecutor, or his/her duly
authorized representatives, to move for the immediate
transmittal of the records as well as the transfer of the
intercepted, disclosed, searched, seized and/or examined
computer data and items, including the complete and
verified inventory thereof, to the court that subsequently
acquired jurisdiction over the criminal action, The motion

for the purpose shall be filed before the court that issued

the warrant and has custody of the computer data within
ten (10) days from the time the criminal action is instituted
and shall be acted upon by the court within a period of
five (5) days.
"Tamoorary custody
chain of custody

1115

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME I

Section 7 .3. Access to and Use of Computer
Data." The package containing the computer data so
deposited under Section 7.1 of this Rule shall not be
opened, or the recordings replayed, or its contents
revealed, or, in any manner, used as evidence, except
upon motion duly granted by the court. The motion for the
purpose shall state:

1) The relevance of the computer data sought to be
opened, replayed, revealed, or used as evidence; and

2) The names of the persons who will be allowed to

have access thereto, if the motion is granted.
The motion shall further include proof of service of
copies sent to the person or persons whose computer data

is the subject of the motion. The said person or persons
shall be given ten (10) days from receipt of notice thereof
to file a comment, after which the court shall rule on the
motion, unless it finds it necessary to conduct a
clarificatory hearing for the purpose,
Section 8. DESTRUCTION OF COMPUTER DATA"

Section 8.1. Duty of Service Providers and Law
Enforcement Authorities to Destroy. - Pursuant to
Section 17 f RA 10175, upon expiration of the periods as
provided in Sections 13 and 15 of the said law, service
providers and law enforcement authorities, as the case
may be, shall immediately and completely destroy the
computer data subject of preservation and examination.

"RA 10175, Chapter 4, Section 16.

"vote rite a)

""[Note omitted]

1116

Appendix D
Rule On Cybrecrime Warrants

Section 8.2. Destruction and Return of Computer
Data in the Custody of the Court. - Upon motion and
due hearing, the court may, for justifiable reasons, order
the complete or partial destruction, or the return to its
lawful owner or possessor, of the computer data or any of
the related items turned over to its custody.
Likewise, the court may, and upon written notice to all
the parties concerned, order the complete or partial
destruction, or return to its lawful owner or possessor, of
the computer data or any of the related items turned over
to its custody if no preliminary investigation or case"
involving these items has been instituted after thirty-one
(31) days from their deposit, or if preliminary investigation
has been so instituted within this period, upon finality of the
prosecutor's resolution finding lack of probable cause. In
its sound discretion, the court may conduct a clarificatory
hearing to further determine if there is no reasonable
opposition to the Items' destruction or return.

If the court finds the destruction or return of disclosed
computer data or subscriber's information subject of a
WDCD to be justified under this Section, It shall first Issue
an order directing the law enforcement authorities to turn-

over the retained copy thereof as described in paragraph 3
of Section 4.5 of this Rule. Upon its turn-over, the retained
copy shall be simultaneously destroyed or returned to its
lawful owner or possessor together with the computer data
or subscriber's information that was originally turned over
to the issuing court.

Section 8.3. Destruction of Computer Data; How
Made. -- The destruction of computer data and related
items, if so allowed under Section 8.2 of this Rule, shall be
made in the presence of the Branch Clerk-of-Court, or In
Refers to criminal actions where prefimir ary inwestiga~on ls not required
as prov de under Section 1, Rule 112 in relation to Section 1, Rule 110 of the
Raes of Crminal Pr&cecure

1117

PRIMER-REVIEWER ON
REMEDIAL LAW
VOLUME II
his/her absence, in the presence of any other person duly
designated by the court to witness the same. The accused

or the person/s from whom such items were seized, or
his/her representative or counsel, as well as the law
enforcement officer allowed access to such items as
indicated in the inventory, or his/her duly authorized
representative, may also be allowed to witness the said
activity; Provided.that they appear during the scheduled

date of destruction upon written notice to them by the
Branch Clerk-of-Court at least three (3) days prior to the
aforementioned date.
Within twenty-four (24) hours from the destruction of

the computer data, the Branch Clerk-of-Court or the
witness duly designated by the court shall issue a sworn
certification as to the fact of destruction and file the said
ce fificate with the same court.
The storage device, or other items turned over to the
court's custody, shall be destroyed by shredding, drilling of
four holes through the device, prying the platters apart, or
other means in accordance with international standards
that will sufficiently make it inoperable.

1118

I

